Diálogo Internacional


Pronunciamento do Ministro de Estado das Relações
Exteriores, Embaixador Luiz Felipe Lampreia, por ocasião
do jantar de inauguração do Foro do Sol M. Linowitz do
diálogo inter-americano sobre o tema “A new InterAmercanism for the Global Age”, Washington, 16 de maio
de 1996

We are gathered here tonight, in the Hall of
the Americas, as representatives of the peoples and
nations of this Hemisphere, to pay tribute to Sol
Linowitz.
This is a man who has anticipated, by his
personality and by his actions, the spirit of the new
Inter-Americanism that we are committed to
consolidate in these present times of globalization and
regional integration.
Brazilians are proud to join in this celebration.
In Brazil we have many prominent members of the
Inter-American Dialogue. As a representative of the
Brazilian government, I bring a word of thankful
recognition for the instrumental contribution of this
forum as a catalyst in promoting a much needed
independent and balanced discussion of issues
pertaining to the development and the improvement
of Hemispheric relations.
Our times are calling for a renewed and
creative commitment to the Hemispheric partnership.
Governments of the entire continent are
working on that commitment, not with rhetorical
purpose, but with a clear bearing and tangible
objectives.
As ideological barriers erode throughout the
world, as democracy and economic freedom become
the pattern in international relations, the international
community moves forward to the consolidation of
universal rules regulating trade and productive
investment, technology flows, non-proliferation and
the enforcement of human rights and environmental
protection.
The way is open for a new kind of international
cooperation, especially in this Hemisphere, where
there is a long-standing tradition of interaction among
countries and peoples.
A new age has come, an age of hope and an
age of commitment to a better and a more prosperous
life for all the peoples of the Americas.
We are proud to live in a Hemisphere that
made democracy its common legacy and its guiding
rule.
Within these bounds, we are fighting for
economic stability and sustained growth. Our goal is
to correct the social unbalances that still affect our
societies and to build a hemispheric system that brings
prosperity to all.
Jobs, not weapons; markets, not political or
ideological divisions: this is the real challenge that the
end of the cold war and of strategic disputes, at the
global and regional levels, allowed us to face in their
entirety.
The fight for competitive integration into the
global market and the new world structure cannot be
a lonely one. Nor should competition be seen as a
ravaging battle for business opportunities, financial deals and commercial operations.
Countries are more and more conscious that
collective action and solidarity, through free trade
agreements, market integration on a sub-regional or
regional level, an intense participation at the
international decision-making process and also strong
sets of bilateral relationships are key to approaching
global markets and global issues.
Credentials, such as political and economic
stability, economic freedom and openness, full
adherence to universal rules and regulations and wide
credibility, are essential. You either play by the rules
or you don’t play at all.
Countries are aware that they should use a
cautious, realistic approach in tackling the challenges
of this day and age. They must be affirmative in
identifying their objectives, in defining their timetable
for negotiations, in engaging constructively in these
negotiations and in building upon what they are
accomplishing.
This is precisely what we are doing in
following-up the commitments reached at the highest
level at the Miami Summit of the Americas, a
cornerstone of a new approach towards Hemispheric
relations.
All the new elements in the contemporary
world structure are present in this pragmatic exercise
of weaving a new pattern of relationship and exchange
within the Americas.
First of all, developing countries in the region
have moved towards more open and outward-looking
economic policies. Those policies have replaced the
import-substitution policies that had prevailed for
decades as a strategy for development and
industrialization. Several unilateral concessions or
advances have been made by countries in the region
that realized the importance of exposing their
economies to outside competition in order to better
respond to the challenges of quality, cost and
productivity.
We have a global framework for trade
relations under the WTO agreements, encompassing
and regulating the world trade agenda and new areas
such as intellectual property rights, investment and
agriculture.
We have a regional commitment to political
understanding and practical cooperation in our
Continent as regards the enhancement of and support
for democracy throughout the region, the fight against
drugs and organized crime, the fight against
corruption.
And we have several sub-regional initiatives,
such as Mercosul, that clearly show that integration
has left the world of policy-planning to become a
strong reality in the day-to-day lives of our countries,
our business communities and our consumers.
As these material and political conditions
unfold, Hemispheric relations gain an unprecedented
momentum, probably the strongest and the most
affirmative since the very inauguration of the PanAmerican movement a century ago.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Recognizing the importance of Inter-American
relations as a platform for our countries’ bid for a
better participation in the world of globalization, the
Inter-American Dialogue has shown its wisdom in
choosing Sol Linowitz as the center figure of this
year’s plenary session. Ambassador Linowitz brings
us his example and inspiration.
An accomplished lawyer, a dedicated public
servant, an outstanding diplomat who served his
country on several occasions helping to forge some
of the most challenging moves of US foreign policy,
Sol Linowitz, as the US negotiator of the Panama
Canal Treaty, has brought to Inter-American relations
a lasting contribution — the engineering of a new
pattern of relationship between the most powerful
country in this Hemisphere, and indeed in the world,
and its developing neighbors.
This new pattern of relationship, based on
mutual respect, confidence and a long term vision of
common interests, has begun to make the dreams
and ideals of the founding-fathers of Inter- Americanism come true.
Among these founding fathers, Brazilians are
proud to see the Baron of Rio Branco, our leading
diplomat and statesman, who identified in the very
first moves towards the Pan-American movement a
tool for promoting better political understanding and
smoother economic cooperation in this continent.
As this century comes to a close, the
inspiration of the founding fathers of Pan-Americanism
and of men like Ambassador Sol Linowitz encourages
us to endure in the process of renewing InterAmerican relations.
These relations can be instrumental in
promoting development, trade, investment,
technology transfer and a wide-range cooperation
among the countries of this Hemisphere.
They certainly profit from a growing web of
improving bilateral relations throughout the region.
And of course they can benefit from the kind
of sound, frank and balanced debates that have
become a trademark of the Inter-American Dialogue.
I am sure that the Sol M. Linowitz Forum will
positively contribute to this dialogue. The odds
couldn’t be better, for the man who inspires this
initiative knows how to make a difference.
As History unfolds in our Hemisphere, let us
follow his example. Let us leave to future generations
of this Continent the legacy of a new InterAmericanism that is based on confidence respect and
a strong sense of community and of shared interests.
Thank you.