Initiative on Diplomacy and Global Health
Discurso do Ministro das Relações Exteriores,
Embaixador Celso Amorim, no evento “Diplomacy and
Global Health “, em Nova York, 27 de setembro de 2007
Dr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the
United Nations
Dr. Margareth Chan, Director-General of
the World Health Organization
Dear Ministers from France, Indonesia,
Norway, Senegal, South Africa and Thailand,
Distinguished delegates,
We commend Norway and France for
taking the lead in the Initiative on Diplomacy and
Global Health. Brazil is proud to have been
associated to this initiative since its very
beginning. It is imperative that global health issues
be placed high on the international agenda. This
is the main objective of the Oslo Declaration.
Out of the eight Millennium Development
Goals, three are directly linked to health. The
eradication of poverty and the improvement of
health care standards are key elements in any
development strategy.
This is why President Lula joined forces
with other world leaders here in New York to
launch the Action against Hunger and Poverty in
2004. That initiative gave impulse to the creation
of the International Drug Purchase Facility
(UNITAID) last year.
The idea of innovative sources of
financing, endorsed by UNITAID, was conceived
as a means of generating additional resources on
a stable and continuous basis. In its first year of
operation, UNITAID has gathered the support of
numerous countries from all over the world. It has
played an important role in providing cheaper
drugs against HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis
– the three diseases most commonly associated
to poverty. South-South cooperation is also a
significant instrument to fighting infectious
diseases and improving health conditions in poor
countries.
Brazil is cooperating with Guinea-Bissau
and Mozambique, among others, to combat HIV/
AIDS epidemics by providing anti-retroviral
medicines and assisting in the prevention of
mother-to-child transmission. We have been
involved in the training of medical personnel and
the installation of infrastructure for treatment.
Brazil is committed to help Mozambique in the
development of a production plant for anti-
retroviral drugs. Much can also be done through
trilateral cooperation involving developed as well
as developing countries. Together with the United
States, for example, Brazil is engaged in a project
to eradicate malaria in São Tome and Principe.
In Haiti, together with India and South
Africa, our partners in the IBSA Forum, Brazil
has been developing a programme of solid waste
management, financed by the IBSA Fund. This
project is crucial to improving Haiti’s sanitary and
health conditions. It won a United Nations award
as the best South-South cooperation initiative last
year. It was also recognized as a model for other peace-building initiatives. The IBSA Fund is a
proof that you don’t need to be rich to show
solidarity.
These are a few examples of how political
will and imagination can bring about concrete
actions towards a healthier world.
Thank you.
