“Q&A: ADDED PUNCH “
ENTREVISTA CONCEDIDA À REVISTA MONOCLE, LONDRES
(OUTUBRO DE 2012)
(original em inglês)
Monocle sits down with Brazil’s foreign
minister Antonio Patriota in London to ask
what he’s doing to take his country’s brand
beyond its image of sun and soccer.
Writer: Steve Bloomfeld
Once Antonio Patriota starts talking about
music, it’s hard to get him to stop. Brazil’s
foreign minister references a Chicago blues
guitarist as he walks into the Ritz hotel and is
waxing lyrical about Radiohead as he leaves
an hour later.
In between he manages to turn his attention
to Brazil’s growing economy, its rising
diplomatic power and the country’s twin
sporting extravaganzas due in the coming four
years. One suspects though, he’d far rather be
regaling you with tales about obscure b-sides
and secret gigs.
A career diplomat who started working at
the awe-inspiring Oscar Niemeyer-designed
Itamaraty Palace almost three decades ago,
Patriota appears to have been given more
of a free rein to direct foreign policy under
President Dilma Rousseff than any of his
successors enjoyed while serving the more
charismatic President Lula Da Silva.
As Brazil tries to refne its global image ahead
of the 2014 football World Cup and 2016
Rio Olympics, Patriota is likely to be at the
forefront of those efforts. First though, he
needs to work out what that image should be.
Sun, samba and soccer can take a country only
so far – what’s more, it makes the ffth-largest
economy and regional superpower look a little
lightweight.
Monocle: You started in the foreign ministry
when you were in your twenties. How has
Brazil’s role within the world changed in that
time?
Antonio Patriota: It has changed quite
considerably. If you go back a few decades, we
were struggling with a very serious inﬂation
problem and a debt problem. We were not a
full democracy. We were still under a regime
that had been a dictatorship. So there were
numerous challenges. It was not a simple task
to represent Brazil in the world although some of our strengths have been there for many
centuries – the creativity of the Brazilian
people, our love of freedom, our love of
sports and art and music, the ?diversity within
Brazil. I have seen Brazil emerge as a country
that represents a successful model in many
ways in reconciling economic strengths and
social progress. Whatever the angle you look
at today it’s an entirely different landscape.
Monocle: And has that been a natural
progression or has it needed to get a bit of a
push from certain leaders?
Antonio Patriota: The foreign ministry today
has at its disposal very powerful instruments,
and this has come about gradually over the
last few years. Under President Lula, there
was a signifcant increase in the number of
embassies worldwide to the point where,
today for example, we have more embassies
in Africa than the UK does. We have also
increased the number of diplomats quite
signifcantly.
Monocle: Brazil has taken a leadership role in
Haiti – do you consider it a success?
Antonio Patriota: Successive troop
commanders have come from Brazil, with the
largest contingent of the troops coming from
the Brazilian Army. When the earthquake
came in 2010 the country responded with
great maturity and a sense of heroic stoicism.
But the UN mission also helped to keep things
in place. Now we are looking at ways to start
phasing out the presence of foreign troops
because obviously we all desire for Haiti to
stand on its own feet. We’ve also been present
in other peacekeeping efforts under the UN
banner. Today we are in Lebanon and have
taken up the command position for the Navy
efforts under the UN ﬂag.
Monocle: Brazil’s joint attempt with Turkey
to negotiate a deal on uranium enrichment
with Iran ended badly. What have you learnt?
Antonio Patriota: I think it was a very valid
attempt to create confdence because one of
the most problematic defcits we need to deal
with when talking about Iran is the defcit of
confdence between Iran and certain members
of the Security Council. The best way to
create confdence is through dialogue, through
negotiation.
Monocle: Can Brazil play a bigger diplomatic
role in issues of war and peace?
Antonio Patriota: You mentioned Haiti, I
mentioned Lebanon and some other ideas but
what we tried to accomplish between Brazil
and Turkey and Iran, was maybe a sign of a
stronger agenda for Brazil and diplomacy and
conﬂict resolution and also I would stress in
preventing conﬂict.
Monocle: Brazil has the third-largest planemaker in the world, Embraer, yet it’s not
closely associated with Brand Brazil. Why?
Antonio Patriota:All those who are interested
in aircrafts are aware of Brazil’s very strong
performance in this feld.
Monocle: Next time you get on an Embraer,
ask the person next to you, “Who made this
plane?” Chances are they’re not going to say a
Brazilian company, are they?
Antonio Patriota: Well maybe because
Brazil is not automatically associated with
a strong industrial competitive component
in our economy. But this is going to become
more part of our image worldwide. We are
placing very strong emphasis on science and echnology and innovation. So, increasingly I
think Brazil is poised to become a leader in
many of these areas.
Monocle: How much of a leadership role
can you play within Latin America and how
important is that for you?
Antonio Patriota: Extremely important.
South America is self-suffcient in food
production, in energy, in water resources. It
is potentially a basket to feed the world; we
already export many products to the rest of
the world, from the agricultural side of things.
So, South America remains our number one
priority. We have the possibility, and this is
historically an opportunity that we will not
let pass, to create a zone of cooperation, of
development, of democracy. We are also a
region free from weapons of mass destruction
and are determined to remain so.