Conferência sobre desarmamento


Pronuciamento do Ministro de Estado das Relações
Exteriores, Embaixador Luiz Felipe Lampreia, no plenário
da conferência sobre desarmamento, Genebra, 14 de maio
de 1996


Mr. President,
It is an honor and a pleasure for me to address
the Conference on Disarmament as Minister of
External Relations of Brazil. As a former Permanent
Representative of my country in Genebra, I take
personal satisfaction in the opportunity of returning
to meet old friends whose wisdom is always a source
of inspiration. My prior experience in this hall has
given ME first-hand contact with and knowledge. of
the challenges and responsibilities before the
Conference on Disarmament, as well as the privilege
of participating in its effort to bring about a world
free of threat from weapons of mass destruction.
At this critical juncture, Mr. President, it augurs
well for the Conference to be presided over by a
seasoned and skilled diplomat such as yourself. I wish
to commend your deft handling of Conference business,
as well as to reiterate the assurance of Brazil’s full
cooperation in the discharge of your difficult task.
I find it particularly gratifying to speak before
the Conference at a time when Brazil holds the
coordinatorship of the Group of 21, a caucus long
known for its unwavering commitment to world peace,
some of whose current members have been calling
for a comprehensive Test-Ban Treary for over forty
years.
The fact that die Group of 21 has never
hesitated to embrace ideals and to put forward
proposals which may often seem ahead of their time
should give this body food for thought as it struggles
to find new ways of dealing with old demands, such
as the global concern and priority issue that is nuclear
disarmament.
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso is
deeply and personally engaged in the cause of peace,
disarmament and cooperation in international
relations. After all. the achievement of the main goals
of his Administration will be greatly facilitated by an
international environment as free as possible of armed
conflict and tension.
As a country committed to disarmament and
non-proliferation, Brazil believes the international
community should become further involved in
significant initiatives leading to disarmament, especially
in the nuclear field. These initiatives should aim at
saving resources from the production of weapons,
mainly weapons of mass destruction, and malting
them available for social and economic advancement
in developing countries such as my own.
The creation of a peaceful and stable
environment that is conclusive to development is
therefore a priority for Brazil. We trust that the recent
conclusion of the Pelindaba and the Bangkok Treaties
opens na unprecedented opportunity for a nuclearfree Southern Hemisphere, to he achieved through a
building-blocks approach. Brazil holds that this is
possible and that it reflects the interests of all who
live south of the Equator. Mr. President,
With the exception of World War II, Brazil
has not been involved in any armed conflict in over a
century. My country maintains exemplary relations
of friendship and cooperation with all of its ten
neighbors.
Ours borders have served to unite, rather than
to divide. Brazilian military expenditure is among the
lowest in the world in terms of GNP.
Brazil as consistently been involved in
international disarmament and non-proliferation
initiatives.
Our treaties that ban whole categories of
weapons of mass destruction. We are engage in the
effort currently underway to enhance the effectiveness
of the Biological Weapons Convention. We also
actively participated in the recently concluded review
process of the Convention of Certain Weapons, to
which Brazil acceded last year.
As regards chemical weapons, swift
ratification of the CWC by the two main possessors
of that class of weapon seems to us imperative in
order to avert the prospect of such a treaty entering
into force without those two States, which would send
an incongruous and disturbing signal to the
international community.
Mr. President,
Brazil holds unequivocal and unquestioned
credentials in the field of disarmament and
nonproliferation.
The principle that nuclear energy should only
be used for peaceful purposes was enshrined in the
1983 Brazilian Constitution. Since March 1994, all
nuclear materials in all nuclear installations in my
country are subject to full scope International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards by means of the application
of the Quadripartite Agreement involving Brazil.
Argentina, the Argentine-Brazilian Agency for
Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials and
the IAEA. In May 1994. the Treaty of Tlatelolco
came into force for Brazil, formalizing at the
international multilateral treaty level our renunciation
of nuclear weapons.
The application of Tlatelolco provisions to the
whole of Latin-America and the Caribbean for the
first time brought to a populated region of our planet
the benefits of being a nuclear weapon free zone,
including legally negative security assurances on the
part of the nuclear weapon States.
Mr.President,
Credentials such as these my country to take
a firm stance in favor of significant and concrete steps
in the field of disarmament. These should be facilitated
by the easing of tensions that followed the end of the
Cold War, and which prompted a number of welcome
developments. I have already highlighted the
importance of steps taken at the multilateral lavel in
the early nineties to ban weapons of mass destruction.
To these, one would be remiss not to add the most
recent unilateral and bilateral actions in the nuclear
sphere, such as: the announcement by three nuclear
weapon States of the decision to halt fissile material
production; ratification of the START-II Treaty by
the United Congress; the decision by the French
Government to close all land-based nuclear operations
well as French Pacific test-sites; signatures by nuclear
weapon States of the Rarotonga and Pelindaba
Treaties additional Protocols.
All these result not from revised military
doctrines regarding the role to be played by weapons
of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons,
in a world fortunately no longer ruled by the deranged
logic of the Cold War. They also represent responses
to new political and economic realities. Internal public
opinion simply does not tolerate bottomless military
budgets anymore; it also shows growing difficult in
accepting the continuing need for, let alone the morality
of, weapons of such force and indiscriminate effects.
Clearly much more needs to be done if the
States holding stockpiles and arsenals of weapons of
mass destruction are truly to heed the call of significant
constituencies within their own countries, as well as of the international community as a whole.
The end of nuclear bipolarity had the
immediate result making disarmament seem outdated,
both because the former opponents evolved a new
pattern of cooperation and because the new security
concerns - regional conflicts and the so-called nonmilitary threats - are not amenable to solutions in terms
of multilateral arms limitation agreements. This
perception. however, is being superseded by a
widespread sentiment of abhorrence of nuclear
weapons, as the intense reactions worldwide against
nuclear testing has shown just recently The fact is
that the welcome changes in the relationship between
the two main nuclear powers did not abolish their
huge stockpiles. These arsenals pose today three very
different kinds of menace: the risk of nuclear accident;
the possibility of nuclear thelf enabling the unthinkable
nuclear terrorism; and the very real, threat of de facto
legitimating nuclear proliferation. Only working
towards the complete elimination of nuclear weapons
could confront these dangers.
Brazil therefore sides with those who believe
measures are urgently needed and that the
Conference on Disarmament should be allowed to
take up its rightful place as the primary forum for
nuclear disarmament negotiations. We of course
commend and encourage the START I and II
processes, whose full implementations will go a long
way in rolling back the two greatest nuclear stockpiles
on earth.. But START II is still to be ratified by the
Russian Federation, which we hope will soon occur.
Moreover, the nuclear arsenals of the other nuclear
weapons States so far remain beyond the pale of any
phased or time-bound international obligation. If we
are to give credence to the recently reaffirmed
commitment to pursue in good faith negotiations on
effective measures relating to nuclear disarmament,
this should be followed by a genuine engagement on
the part of all nuclear weapon States in a nuclear
disarmament process within the context of the CD,
as the sole multilateral disarmament negotiating body.
Allowing for CD expansion through the
immediate implementation of the terms of the decision
taken last September and contained in document CD/
1356, whereby twenty-three States will all assume
together membership of the Conference, would, for
its part, inject new life into enhance the
representativeness of the CD, thus facilitating its future
negotiating tasks, one of the very first of which could
be a fissile material cutoff convention.
If it is true that our attention has recently been
focused on an early conclusion of a CTBT, this should
not prevent us from launching discussions on a cutoff convention. This would be the next logical stage
in our work, one that we should not delay in carrying
out. Together with the CTBT, the cut-off convention
will be a significant step in capping the nuclear arms
race. It is thus regrettable that the ad hoc committee
on this issue, whose mandate was agreed upon by
this Conference in the beginning of last year, has not
met so far.
Mr. President,
Let me turn the main issue with which the CD
has been grappling for nearly three years now and
whose negotiation I dare to trust is entering its final,
decision-making stage. I need not emphasize that to
my country, as well as to most - if not all - of those
represented around this table and in this hall, having
a Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty ready for signature
by the outset of the 51st session of the U.N. General
Assembly is more than an aspiration - it is a matter of
giving concrete expression to the international
community’s conviction that nuclear tests and all they
represent no longer have a place in today’s world.
Indeed, the prohibition to be imposed on
nuclear testing is not and should not be made to
become na end in itself. It Is but a first step. though a
very significant one. As a treaty which will ban an
activity inextricably associated with and necessary for
carrying on with the infernal spiral of developing,
manufacturing, improving and stockpiling nuclear
weapons, the CTBT not only can but should serve
as a catalyst for nuclear disarmament. Setting the CTBT in its proper context would therefore require
provisions emphasizing the vertical proliferation
constraint it imposes; highlighting its role in the reversal
of the nuclear arms race and in the process of nuclear
disarmament; and stressing the need for the complete
elimination of nuclear weapons at the earliest possible
time and according to a phased program under a
multilaterally agreed process of nuclear disarmament.
Given divergence of views regarding these issues, I
submit these proposals with an open mind as to their
possible further improvement, given the pressing need
at this stage for bridging gaps and for finding
formulations which attract general support. The price
to pay for a universal treaty that would be decisive
for nuclear disarmament and for all dimension of nonproliferation is, in our view, well worth the cost.
Thoughout the CTBT negotiations, Brazil has
been committed to a treaty that is both meaningful in
purpose and endowed with effective means of
verification. In the coming weeks, the Brazilian
delegation, acting on my direct instructions, will
redouble its efforts in striving to accommodate all
reasonable concerns and to keep the negotiations
within the timeframe set by the United Nations General
Assembly. We are sure that CTBT signature in the
next months is a viable proposition. But for that we
need to see movement not just on the part those who
still show reluctance to accept the most widely
supported formulation for the article on the Treat’s
scope, for stance, or on the part of those Who still
admit exceptions to the ban. We also need to see
that others realize the limits to the general acceptance
of same of their controversial proposals, such as
stripping the international Data Centre of analytical
capacity; creating special arrangements for the
payment of annual verification.
Mr. President,
I am well aware that during the first part of
the 1996 session the Ad Hoc Committee on CTBT
received important contributions from Iran and
Australia and from its own Chairman, Ambassador
Jaap Ramaker, toward an early conclusion of
negotiations. The Conference also heard many
exhortations, not least from the Brazilian delegation
itself, to the same effect. Let me be the first to reiterate
this plea on this second part of the 1996 session. The
stakes are too high for the international community to
let this opportunity for concluding the CTBT go by.
Mr. President,
Before closing, let me address the issue of
the future role of this body in the edifice of international
relations. Some year ago, when the Chemical
Weapons Convention was nearly finished, it was
fashionable to ask if “there would be life after the
CWC”. The same doubts seem to have arisen again
concerning the post-CTBT phase.
Brazil does not entertain such skeptielsm. We
are confident that the Conference on Disarmament
will continue to fulfill an important task in ensuring
progress toward a more peaceful and stable world.
Alongside the capacity, respond rapidly to threats to
international peace and security attributed to the
Security Council of the United Nations, it is essential
to have a forum where issues related to disarmament
and thus to peace receive a more universal, systematic
and prospective treatment. Moreover, there is no lack
of areas of disarmament that would warrant
negotiating multilateral agreement by the international
community. The problem is, as it always has been, to
identify what is considered negotiable by the various
members of that community. A spirit of dialogue and
flexibility from all quarters will certainly help in devising
the agenda for the years to come, as we continue to
strive for a world free from weapons of mall
destruction.
Thank you.