“Brazil ups pressure on Europe ahead of trade
talks” - Entrevista concedida pelo Ministro das
Relações Exteriores, Embaixador Celso Amorim,
à agência Reuters, em 12 de dezembro de 2005
By Susan Fenton
HONG KONG - Brazil believes that growing
political pressure will force a multilateral trade agreement
next year but says an urgent gesture is needed from the
European Union to move talks forward.
“The political pressure is growing for an
agreement”, Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso Amorim
told Reuters on the eve of a ministerial meeting of the
World Trade Organisation in Hong Kong. “I don’t
think the Doha round will collapse. It would be too
big a responsibility for everyone”.
Brazil is a key player in the Doha
Development round of talks which must be
completed by early 2007. The talks are being held
up by the lack of a serious offer by the European
Union to cut import tariffs on agricultural goods,
Amorim said on Sunday.
The EU has proposed cutting average import
tariffs on agricultural goods by 38 percent, far short
of demands by Brazil and other members of the G-
20 group of developing nations for a 54 percent
reduction.
The European Union maintains it cannot make
any further offer until leading developing nations cut
barriers to trade in industrial goods and services.
Amorim dismissed calls by the EU for Brazil to slash
its import tariffs on industrial goods by 75 percent.
“This is not a round primarily to help Europe
but a development round to help developing
countries”, Amorim said.
“How can someone ask a developing country
for a 75 percent cut in industrial goods and at the
same time in reciprocity offer to cut its tariffs on
agricultural goods by 38 percent? That doesn’t stand
to reason”, he said.
However, Amorim said that a further offer by
the EU, even if it was less than the 54 percent
required, would be an encouraging sign. “If they
484
offered a cut of 45 or 46 percent say, we would not
accept – because we are asking for 54 percent – but
that would be a sign that they are willing to do
business”, he said.
AMBITIOUS APPROACH
Brazil recently signalled it was willing to make
further concessions on opening up its markets for
industrial goods and services but only after Europe
moves first.
Farm leaders from the Cairns Group of
agricultural exporting countries said on Sunday that
the Doha round was under serious threat of failure if
Europe did not make concessions.
“The EU is calling for a very ambitious
approach on non-agricultural market access but is
not prepared to make a similar approach on
agricultural market access. That view needs to be
balanced”, Peter Corish, president of the Cairns
Group Farm Leaders Organisation, told reporters.
Led by Australia, the group includes Brazil
among other Latin American countries as well as
South Africa and some Asian countries such as
Thailand.
Amorim believes Europe will finally be forced
by political pressure to make a new offer but not until
next year.
“I don’t think there will be an offer here in
Hong Kong. But I hope I’m wrong”, he said.
The Doha round, which would lift millions out
of poverty in poorer nations, needs to be completed
before a U.S. presidential “fast-track” authority to
negotiate a trade deal expires in 2007.
Still, Amorim believes some progress can be
made at this week’s meeting, which starts on Tuesday
and brings together trade ministers from all 148 WTO
members. Reaching agreements on thresholds for tariff
bands is possible, he said.
The WTO agreed last year to eliminate export
subsidies and getting the EU to agree to set 2010 as
the deadline for this, as many other members have
said they are in favour of, would be another sign of progress, he said.
“That would be the kind of gesture that would
show they are serious on reforming agriculture,” he
said. “That would be a big encouragement to the
round as a whole”.
Smaller ministerial meetings would continue
next year and Amorim said a final framework trade
pact could be reached by the middle of 2006.
“There’s still time. I would rather wait for
another six months and some political pressure to
build up. We want to finish it and finish it quickly but
not at any price”, Amorim said.
