“GoVerninG Brazil”
entreVista ConCedida à PuBliCação “Brazil Confidential”
(06/01/2012 a 18/01/2012)

Brazil’s foreign minister says the country
has adopted a multi-polar but co-operative
approach to world affairs.
Like her predecessor Luis Inácio Lula da Silva,
President Dilma Rousseff has been quick to
stress the importance of Brazil’s relationships
with the emerging nations of Asia, Latin
America, Africa and the Middle East. She
made her frst foreign trip to argentina,
and followed that up by meeting Chinese
leaders in Beijing. The president toured
Africa in October, underlining the continent’s
importance for Brazilian diplomats.
There has also been something of a southwards
move in Brazil’s trade and investment relations.
European and US demand may be depressed,
but Brazil’s exports to China and other Asian
partners continue to grow. It would be easy
to assume that all this is indicative of a more
profound shift in foreign policy, with Brazil
playing a pivotal role in the new alliances of
southern nations. The unconventional world
map hanging in antônio Patriota’s offce in the
itamaraty Palace in Brasília seems to confrm
that view. On it, Africa, Latin America, and Asia
sit above the subordinate northern continents.
But Ms Rousseff’s foreign minister does
not share this perspective, arguing that his
country has simply adopted a more diversifed
approach that is in line with new international
economic realities. mr Patriota ﬂatly denies
that there has been any dilution of the US
relationship. “In fact, when I was ambassador
[to the US under Lula] we enhanced our
relationship. We had record trade fgures in
2008, right before the economic crisis hit the
Us, increasing visits by ministers, governors,
new mechanisms such as the joint programme
of action on combating racial discrimination.”
Nor were ties with Europe weakened, he
argues. “We became strategic partners with
the European Union and if anything, Lula
enjoyed warm, close dialogue, unprecedented
familiarity with leaders in the developed
world; [in particular there were regular]
phone calls and meetings and frequent contact
between him and Gordon Brown.”
Instead, Mr Patriota says, Brazil has simply
put greater emphasis on its dealings with
other parts of the world. Latin America has
been one priority. There has, he says, been
great importance attached to South American integration, underlined by the creation in 2008
of the South American community of nations,
unasur. “For the frst time we started looking
seriously at infrastructure projects, closer trade
relations, mechanisms to diffuse tensions.”
Taking care to distinguish it from Latin
America (which includes Mexico and Central
America), Mr Patriota describes South
America “a very strong regional anchor…
with certain very unique characteristics
when you look at the world, extraordinary
mineral wealth, potentially an agricultural
powerhouse, self-suffcient in food production
and water, democratic governments, [and] a
zone of peace.”
Another has been the amount of attention
given to smaller and poorer countries, an
aspect of policy which Mr. Patriota labels
the “innovative aspects of universalisation”.
Brazil has opened a large number of embassies
in Africa; it now has stronger diplomatic
representation on the continent than the Uk.
In many cases that representation has helped
Brazilian business, although Mr Patriota
stresses that commercial links have been
accompanied by “genuine concern for the
dissemination of modern governance and
policies that have worked in Brazil”.
Brazil has also eyed the potential of other
poorer countries. “When the Lula government
started, there were several countries in Africa
and Central asia and South Pacifc – Nepal,
Bhutan, vanuatu, Central African Republic,
Comoros Islands – with which we didn’t have
even diplomatic relations. now we do.”
Brazil has also eyed the potential of other
poorer countries. “When the Lula government
started, there were several countries in Africa
and Central asia and South Pacifc – Nepal,
Bhutan, vanuatu, Central African Republic,
Comoros Islands – with which we didn’t have
even diplomatic relations. Now we do.”
New coalitions have been created, such as
IBSA, joining India, Brazil, South Africa,
three large multi-ethnic democracies from
the south or the forums that link Brazil with
Africa and the Arab World. “This caught the
attention because it was original... but it was
not to the detriment to relations with the north.
“I remember in Washington the head of the
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB)
for example telling other countries, listen, you
should do what Brazil’s doing, diversify your
partners,” says Mr Patriota.
Mr Patriota describes this policy as a kind of
“cooperative multi-polarity”, cooperative in the
sense that it is clearly different from the rather
more conﬂictive anti-american version of this
same approach described in the local media.
“The Brazilian press [initially] tried to depict
this foreign policy as oriented toward the south
in an ideological way, but what the actual
movement of foreign policy demonstrated
was an ability to place Brazil ahead of the
curve, because it led to diversifcation of
partnerships.”
Those criticisms, though, have begun to die
down, he says. At “some point along the road,
and especially the crisis in 2008 contributed
indirectly to this, you started hearing less
and less criticism because it became obvious
that this was a very pragmatic policy. If
ideology were mixed into it, I think it was
just the ideology of interacting with the entire
international community and creating an
international system that works.”