Artigo do Ministro das Relações Exteriores, Celso Amorim,
intitulado “Seven years of progress, expansion”, publicado
no periódico norte-americano “The Miami Herald”. 13/9/2010
skepticism about the need to make changes
in the world economic geography and that
Brazil and other countries were ready to
play a significant role in the World Trade
Organization or gain permanent seats on the
U.N. Security Council. Both the world and
Brazil have changed quite rapidly. Developing
countries have presented higher economic
growth, becoming central actors in the world
economy.
Greater South-South coordination -- at the
WTO, International Monetary Fund, United
Nations and new coalitions such as the BRIC
(Brazil, Russia, India and China) -- have raised
the voices of countries once relegated to a
secondary position. The more the developing
countries discuss and cooperate, the more
their voices will be heard. The recent financial
crisis made it clear that the world can no
longer be governed by just a few.
Progress on many fronts -- from
macroeconomic stability to social justice --
has made Brazil more stable and less unfair,
changing its perception abroad. A new group of
countries has increasingly earned influence in
the international agenda, from climate change
to trade, from finance to peace and security,
and are bringing about new perspectives to
global problems.
It was in this context that we advanced a
comprehensive and proactive foreign policy.
We sought to build coalitions that have gone
beyond traditional alliances and relations that
we strove to maintain and enhance, such as
in the establishment of a Strategic Partnership
with the European Union and a Global
Partnership Dialogue with the United States.
Significant growth in our exports to
developing countries and new mechanisms
such as the G-20 within the WTO, the IBSA
Dialogue Forum (India, Brazil and South
Africa) and BRICs, reflect this trend towards
a global foreign policy.
Steps toward integration
The basis for this new foreign policy was
the increased integration of South America.
From Day One, President Lula has undertaken
efforts toward integrating the continent,
through trade, infrastructure and political
dialogue, which saw the creation of a new
entity -- the Union of South American Nations.
The
Mercosur-Andean
Community
agreement established a free-trade zone in
South America, whose physical integration,
linking the Atlantic and the Pacific, has seen
remarkable progress.
Building on a better integrated South
America, Brazil engaged in creating
mechanisms for dialogue and cooperation
with countries in other regions. The G-20
creation within the WTO, in 2003, marked the
coming of age of countries from the South, transforming once and for all the decision-
making process in trade negotiations.
The IBSA allowed close coordination
among three major multiethnic and
multicultural democracies, which have
much to say about upholding tolerance and
reconciling development with democracy.
The IBSA has become a model for projects
benefiting poorer nations, thus demonstrating
in practice that solidarity is not an attribute of
the rich.
The summits between South American
and African countries, as well as with Arab
countries, connecting regions that were
far apart, strengthened economic relations.
Brazilian trade with Arab countries grew four-
fold in seven years, while trade with Africa,
five-fold, to more than $26 billion, surpassing
trade with Germany and Japan.
These new coalitions are helping to change
the world. The replacement of the G-7 with
the G-20 constitutes evidence that decisions
regarding the world economy lack legitimacy
and effectiveness in the absence of emerging
countries.
In the field of peace and security, Brazil and
Turkey were able to persuade Iran to take on
the commitments provided for in the Tehran
Declaration. New perspectives and approaches
are necessary to tackle issues previously dealt
with exclusively by the permanent members
of the Security Council. Despite resistance
to an initiative nurtured outside the restricted
circle of nuclear powers, we are certain that
it will serve as a basis for negotiations and a
settlement for that issue.
Good foreign policy requires prudence.
But it also requires boldness. It is usual to hear
that countries should act in accordance with
their means, but the greatest mistake one could
make is to underestimate one’s possibilities.
Brazil has acted with boldness and, like
other developing countries, has changed its
410
place in the world. Today such countries are
bearing increasing responsibilities, entitled to
play an ever more central role in the decisions
that affect the destiny of the planet.
Celso Amorim is Brazil’s foreign minister.
Artigo do Ministro das Relações Exteriores,
Celso Amorim, intitulado “Governance must
reflect global reality”, publicado no periódico
“Financial Times”. 15/11/2010
A profound adjustment is needed in world
governance.
We seem to be stuck with structures similar
to those of vast empires of the past, where
decisions are taken behind closed doors by
a handful of actors, regardless of what wider
society has become.
An article published this year by the
Financial Times showed that the Bric countries
will account for more than 60 per cent of the
world’s growth from 2008 to 2014.
Emerging and developing economies will
create a significantly larger share of global
growth. Brazil itself is poised to become the
fifth-largest economy by the end of the decade.
A new group of countries has surely earned
growing influence on core issues on the
international agenda, from climate change to
trade, from finance to peace and security.
They bring fresh perspectives and contribute
to a new, fairer international balance.
Yet their ability to express legitimate
interests, is constrained by global governance
structures that are no longer representative.
In a domestic context, such a situation
might lead to revolution; in a world with
obsolete institutions, it is leading to collateral
alliances.
Greater co-ordination in the WTO, the IMF,
the UN, as well as new coalitions, such as the
Bric, have allowed developing countries to
raise their profile.
The Bric grouping has evolved to an
effective forum for discussion and co- ordination of international issues, especially
those related to the economy.
Two summits have already been held, the
first in Ekaterinburg, the second in Brasília.
The third is scheduled for 2011 in China, but
before that the leaders will meet in Seoul at
the margins of the G20.
Although there are differences between
members, there is a shared view of the need to
improve global governance.
Regional and inter-regional co-ordination
among emerging and developing countries is
expanding rapidly in Africa, Asia and Latin
America and the Caribbean.
Trade and investment patterns have
changed to reflect this. So much so, that the
definition of peripheral countries has to be
continuously reassessed.
Overall these trends represent a welcome
evolution, generating more balance. It was the
perception of such a scenario several years
ago, that prompted Brazilian diplomacy to
adjust its course.
The more developing countries discuss
and co-operate, the more their voices will be
heard.
The memory of a side meeting during the
WTO Ministerial in Hong Kong, in 2005, is
still vivid for me. We had decided to summon
a gathering of developing nations to discuss –
and protest against – the subsidies paid by rich
countries to their agriculture, to the detriment
of poor farmers around the world, in particular
cotton growers in Africa.
Quite unexpectedly, more than 100
delegations showed up, eager to tackle one
of the most harmful forms of agricultural
subsidies.
The “G110”, as this group called itself,
issued a strong statement urging that export
subsidies be eliminated by 2010.
In the event, the Hong Kong Declaration
established 2013 as a deadline. As things stand
now, we are far from sure this promise will be
kept.
But that near-spontaneous movement had a
bigger impact on the result of the conference
than any behind-the-scenes negotiation.
Another example of “collateral action”
was the recent Brazilian-Turkish brokered
Tehran Declaration, which made clear that new
perspectives and approaches are necessary to
solve seemingly intractable problems.
This initiative, essentially the proposal
originally made by some permanent members of
the Security Council (and ultimately rejected),
was brought to fruition by two emerging powers.
The recent financial crisis also made it clear
that the world can no longer be run by a club of
just a few.
The economic meltdown – from which, not
by accident, some emerging economies were
essentially spared – represented a “revolution”
of some sort, replacing the inoperative G8 with
the brisk G20.
The IMF has just increased the voting
power of developing nations, thus increasing
its legitimacy as well. But change in decision-
making structures needs to go beyond the
economic sphere.
Barack Obama just announced US support
for India’s candidacy for a permanent seat in the
Security Council.
From finance to peace and security, no
sustainable solution to any significant problem
can be found if relevant players are not involved.
The idea is simple: representativeness brings
legitimacy and thus greater efficacy.
Let us not wait for widespread crises to bring
the core institutions of world governance in line
with the real world. Let us practice democracy
not only domestically but also in the global
sphere.
Celso Amorim is Brazil’s foreign minister
