Conferência de imprensa do NG-5 –
Embaixador Celso Amorim, Ministro das
Relações Exteriores (Parque Anhembi, São
Paulo, 13.06.2004)
Celso Amorim: Eu queria dizer que nós tivemos
uma reunião intensa, que durou quase quatro horas.
Foi uma reunião importante em que nós discutimos a
questão agrícola na OMC e discutimos os três pilares:
subsídios à exportação, ou export competition,
como se diz mais freqüentemente em inglês; apoio doméstico; e acesso a mercados. Sobre todos os
três tivemos uma conversa frutífera, em que
entendemos melhor as preocupações de cada uma
das partes – no nosso caso, lembrando que Brasil e
Índia não só falam em nome próprio, mas também
em nome do G-20 –, concordamos que é preciso
prosseguir nos três pilares paralelamente e que há
trabalho a fazer em relação aos três pilares. Como,
no caso do pilar de acesso a mercados, houve, mais
recentemente, uma proposta, nós discutimos
elementos dessa proposta e discutimos também o
sumário que havia sido feito pelo Presidente do
Comitê Agrícola. E com base nessas discussões, nós
achamos que há trabalho a ser feito pelos técnicos,
daqui até a próxima semana, não essa que começa
segunda-feira agora, mas a outra, quando o Comitê
Agrícola voltará a se reunir. Achamos que foi uma
discussão útil, que temos possibilidades de avançar,
mas que há, efetivamente, muito trabalho pela frente.
Dessa maneira, eu resumiria o que foi discutido. Não
sei se algum dos meus colegas quer acrescentar algo
ao que eu disse.
Ministro Ricardo Neiva Tavares, Porta-Voz
do MRE: Passamos às perguntas.
André Soliani, Folha de São Paulo: Ministro
Celso Amorim, ontem, o senhor mencionou a
importância de ver a União Européia e os Estados
Unidos discutirem a questão do paralelismo. Eu
queria saber o que foi falado sobre isso, não só pelo
senhor, mas também pelo Sr. Zoellick e o Sr. Lamy,
nessa discussão. Eu queria saber se realmente houve
algum avanço e se ficou claro que haverá eliminação
de subsídios agrícolas, sejam diretos ou indiretos, ao
longo das negociações.
Celso Amorim: Como eu disse, há muito trabalho
a fazer. Esse tema foi discutido, com a profundidade
que o tempo permitiu. Nós discutimos cada tema por
mais ou menos uma hora e depois tivemos uma
pequena discussão geral. Cremos que os temas e os
vários aspectos discutidos dão margem a que se
possa progredir, mas essa conversa terá que continuar
no nível técnico.
388
Pascal Lamy, Comissário para Assuntos de
Comércio da União Européia: As Celso said, we
have three main issues. One of the positive things of
today’s meeting is that we have commonly resolved
to address them, in the same vein, in the same spirit,
in the same degree of precision. On your point about
export competition, the side of the problem which
has to do with export support, export subsidies, I
think the good news is that there is understanding at
our level that parallelism and equivalence are the name
of the game. What remains to be done, of course,
and this is what technical people will have to do, is to
translate this into technical parameters.
Pergunta: This is a question to Mr. Lamy, or to
Mr. Zoellick. Everybody is talking about specificity
nowadays. Has there been any specificity which has
been talked about in domestic support or export
subsidies, like the Swiss Formula or, say, by an
amount 10 billion US dollars? Were there any specific
discussions on specificities?
Robert Zoellick, Representante Comercial
dos Estados Unidos: Let me start with this one.
First, let me just say how much my colleagues and I
appreciate that Mr. Amorim is convening this meeting.
It comes at a busy time with the UNCTAD meeting,
but it allowed us to meet the new Minister from India.
My own sense is that it comes at a very important
time in the process, because there was an Agriculture
Exports Meeting in Geneva, the first week of June,
there will be one next week, and so this is a very
important time and we appreciate Brazil taking that
initiative. It fits the role that Brazil plays in the world
economy trading system. On the aspects of specificity,
there has been a great deal of specificity in export
subsidies in the past couple of weeks. Commissioner
Lamy, on behalf of the European Union, agreed to
eliminate export subsidies. You can’t get any more
specific than that. As he described, we also spent
about an hour trying to talk about how we achieve
the parallelism and equivalence, which, of course, is
a concern to all our countries. On domestic support,
that’s not where the Swiss Formula would come in; that’s a market access issue, that’s cutting tariffs. On
domestic support, the text that was developed in
Cancún has a lot of specificity, but we have discussed
other aspects of it, related to the different boxes and
how to ensure there is an overall, not only reform,
but also cuts in trade distorting support. As
Commissioner Lamy said, we also had a good
discussion on market access. That’s where some of
the issues would fit in about different types of
mechanisms and formulas. I think what the Ministers
pointed to was how we need to further develop that
framework building on some of the principles that
came out of the G-20 paper, some of the ideas that
others have had and that some of our experts have
focused on. So, the task now is to move forward all
three pillars in parallel, in a similar level of specificity
and recognizing that we’re only five countries and
this has to be done in a context of the overall WTO
with all the 147 members. We were fortunate that
Ambassador Grosser, who is the chair on the
agriculture text, sat in the meeting. So, I think it was
very constructive.
Andrew Hay, Reuters News Service: I wonder
if you discussed the issue of tariff rate quotas as a
solution on the market access issue.
Celso Amorim: Bem, talvez não com a
especificidade que você está colocando. Obviamente,
todos os temas relativos a acesso a mercados foram
discutidos e quotas tarifárias é um deles. Se é, ou não, a
solução, ou uma solução, ou uma das soluções, esse é
um dos trabalhos que os técnicos terão de fazer. O que
eu acho que nós pudemos fazer, dessa vez, foi encontrar
bastante massa crítica, do ponto de vista político, para
pedir que os nossos técnicos continuem a trabalhar em
vários aspectos que dizem respeito a acesso a mercados,
buscando um nível de precisão maior, amplificando em
relação ao que foi feito pelo G-20, ou que foi resumido
pelo próprio Presidente do Comitê Agrícola. Mas eu
acho que nós não queremos ainda prejulgar os
resultados desse trabalho.
Kamal Nath, Ministro do Comércio e Indústria
da Índia: As market access is concerned, up to now, in
the earlier discussions, there was a complete diversion
of views, but today, I must say that there appears to be
some convergence. Now, it’s for the technicians to work
out details, details which will lead to further discussions,
so that trade market access really means trade on a
sustainable basis. I think everyone relies that market
access is as important a pillar as the other two pillars,
and keeping the intensity for all three pillars we hope to
be moving forward with this.
Raymond Collit, Financial Times: I think we
all appreciate the complexity of the issues at hand. I
was wondering if you could, for our millions of readers
and television watchers who don’t understand this
complexity, get a sort of a general assessment of
where we are, and where we’re going, especially,
the time frame. There has been a time frame, which
was set until mid July. We’re now in mid June. It
sounds like there is still a lot to be done by this time
frame you’ve set to yourselves. What happens if we
don’t make that time frame? What is your
assessment? I was wondering if Mr. Lamy and Mr.
Zoellick could address this...
Pascal Lamy: Let’s acknowledge, frankly, that
turning all this to something which your listeners, or
readers, or viewers can understand is what we call a
Herculean task. To put it as simply as possible, the political
direction is that? export support has to be phased out;
trade distorting domestic support has to be substantially
reduced; market access has to be substantially improved.
That’s the politics. At the end of the day, it will have to
translate in numbers, x, y, z minus 10, or x per cent, and
so on, which is the frustration we will have until, not the
end of July, but until the final end point of the Doha
Round, because numbers will only come at the end.
What we’re trying now is halfway between this political
direction, which your readers can understand, and the
final numbers; is to structure the negotiation, so that we’ll
only have the numbers to negotiate in the second stage.
So, we have to create boxes, parameters, and formulas
in each of the three areas, agree to that, so that, then,
there is nothing more to do in this agricultural pillar than
decide on numbers, compromise on numbers. So, we’re sort of boxing, framing, structuring, sort of sketching each
and every of these three things. Of course, it’s very
intensive in political terms because, depending on the
way you structure this, there are things we’ll all be
committed to do and, of course, this is sensitive. So, I
think that’s what we’re trying and, of course, a joint
effort endeavor is to try to do this by the end of July. So
that, in this area of the negotiation, as in the three other
areas of the negotiation, we’ll be concentrating in July,
we’re sort of halfway.
Mark Vaile, Ministro do Comércio da
Austrália: If I could just add to that point, in terms
of the significance of the process and the timing, we
need to bear in mind that we’ve further advanced in
terms of convergence in dealing with the very critical
issues of the knob of agricultural trade reform than
we’ve been in the 50-plus years of the history of the
organization. I think the significance in terms of the
focus on the timing has brought us here together at
the beginning of the week of the UNCTAD
Conference, by an invitation of Mr. Amorim. We
certainly thank him and his government for making
these arrangements. In terms of the nature of the
discussions on the issues that you’ve mentioned in
your questions, it was very productive and fruitful,
and continues to move forward so that our officials in
Geneva can continue to work towards a framework,
if we can achieve that by July. But, importantly, it
should not be underestimated the commitment of all
members of the WTO, and particularly the key
players in terms of moving the Agriculture Agenda
forward. I mean, there is work to be done in other
areas, but agriculture has always historically been the
most difficult and the most sensitive area. But in terms
of recent months there has been a significant progress.
Celso Amorim: Eu queria só completar também
a resposta porque uma reunião como essa, para a
qual nós convidamos os quatro outros Ministros, não
é algo que esteja totalmente isento de risco. Neste
momento, os cincos Ministros dos cinco países, e no
caso da União Européia, um grupo de países, que
representam diferentes interesses, se reúnem num
390
momento crucial. Eu acho que o fato de nós termos
percebido que há convergência suficiente – reparem
que são países muito diferentes em muitos sentidos,
e isso já é, em si, histórico, se compararmos com
outras negociações do passado; o fato de nós termos
encontrado convergências suficientes para instruir os
nossos altos funcionários a continuar o trabalho com
urgência, acho que é algo muito significativo. É uma
mensagem de que há muito trabalho por fazer até
julho, mas é também uma mensagem de confiança.
Eu acho que isso é algo importante. Não temos
ilusões, não chegamos lá ainda, mas continuamos
caminhando na direção certa. Eu acho que isso é
muito importante de ser captado por todos.
Robert Zoellick: You said you’re from the
Financial Times and you asked us to explain this to
your readers. I’m afraid, my vocabulary isn’t as big
as the Financial Times readers’, so I have the reverse
problem of my political friend in Europe. But, I would
try to explain it this way. First of all, as a number of
our leaders have recently pointed out, the context is
one in which the United States is having a good
economic recovery, as many other countries in the
world, like China, East Asia, some in Latin America
and India, who is growing well. So, there is a point of
strategic economic opportunity. If we could combine
an upswing in the global economy with a real opening
in the markets around the world, that’s the best thing
we could do to extend growth, deepen it and have it
promote development. The WTO works through
consensus with 147 members now. So, it’s an
extremely difficult process and it works in stages. The
first stage, at Doha, was to create a working agenda
and mandate. The next stage, which was supposed
to be done at Cancún, was to try to further refine
how we would address those topics in reducing
barriers, tariffs and subsidies. We were unsuccessful.
So far, in 2004, we’ve seen some important
movement. The European Union, Japan, Korea, have
agreed in one area of the negotiations of the Singapore
issues to focus on trade facilitation. That’s a big plus
for many developing countries, particularly in Africa, but also India and other colleagues. But, we also now
have to figure out how to move ahead in agriculture,
goods and services, which are the real core of the
world economy. We’ve all realized that agriculture is
the real key to unlocking that door. So, the way this
meeting fits into that is that there are three pillars in
agriculture. We’ve all agreed that the three pillars need
to move together, roughly with the same level of detail
at this stage, to explain how we will do the cuts in
liberalization. And as Commissioner Lamy mentioned,
that would not yet mean the numbers – they would
come in the next stage, but we would create the
means. Now, your readers may think this is a very
complicated process, but it’s the way you bring along
147 players at once. So, this meeting comes at a very
important time. As I said, I compliment Celso and his
government for having it, because we only have five
weeks left, and there’s still a lot of work to be done,
and a lot of these concepts still have to be translated
into words and frameworks and that’s where the
WTO becomes hardest, because, ultimately, these
are political-level decisions, but there is a lot of
technical work to be done. So, we need a blend of
our expert people, some of which are with us, some
of which are in Geneva, and some core decisions.
So, it moves in these steps and stages, but I think,
again, on export subsidies; we have the chance of
doing something extremely historic – the elimination
of export subsidies with equivalence for other forms.
As to domestic support, if you go back and look at
the cuts in the Uruguay Round, we’re looking at a
much deeper set of cuts and reforms here. Therefore,
we’re trying to get the framework, with the numbers
to come next. As to market access, obviously, it’s
critical, that’s opening the overall markets for both
developing and developed countries, while taking into
due count the special and differential treatment. Now,
there are other issues. For example, there are some
issues that are related particularly to the development
agenda. Some of them flow through, but they also
have to be taken into account. There are other topics
that some of our other colleagues would have
emphasized, in terms of rules development. But, at
this stage, we’re really focusing primarily on this key
agriculture topic and that these three pillars move
together. Our hope is, by July, to have those
frameworks, to basically accomplish what we didn’t
accomplish in Cancún which would give momentum
for the next stage, which is putting in the numbers. If
we are successful with that, then you’ve completed
the other aspect of the strategic economic opportunity
that I have suggested.
Sérgio Leo, Valor Econômico: Até
recentemente, o Sr. Lamy argumentava que, para os
países europeus, seria muito difícil avançar nessa
liberalização agrícola, sem avanços paralelos e
similares em outras áreas de negociação. Eu gostaria
de saber se esse tema veio à tona nessa reunião e o
que o Sr. Lamy espera nesse sentido.
Pascal Lamy: When we together decided on the
agenda of the negotiation in Doha, we put sort of 20
topics on the list. And these 20 topics are on the table.
They are part of what we call “the single undertaking”,
which means that nothing will be agreed on one of
the topics if all the other topics together are not agreed.
So, this chain, this link between the topics, remains,
and the negotiation, at the end of the day, will have
moved on all these topics. Now, given the dynamic
of the negotiation and the concerns here and there,
we have agreed that we would focus, in July, on
modalities on agriculture, industrial tariffs, what
remains of the Singapore issues and development
issues, plus, probably, something about services.
These are linked, as these five topics are linked with
the others. So, this link remains and, within agriculture,
the three pillars are linked with one another. And within
the first pillar, which we mentioned, which is export
competition, what Franz Fischler and myself said in
terms of export subsidies is linked and conditioned
on the fact that others proceed to the same sort of
disarmament as we do. So, there are links everywhere
and none of us, of course, will agree to make a
concession on the table, which will be valid, without
the rest of the thing coming. This is why we have to meet from time to time at this level, to check that the
systems move in parallel. And that’s why what Celso
Amorim and Bob Zoellick, for instance, in terms of
the degree of precision on this agriculture topic, on
which we’ve spent most of our time today – and the
degree of precision in the three pillars is the same –,
think it so important. It encourages the ones of us
who have moved, and I have a vague feeling that we
have made a rather good move to explain to our
constituencies that we are not just stupid, naïve,
dreaming negotiators who put things on the table,
without the others doing the same, which is, of course,
a criticism which we all have to face at home. So, this
is conditional, of course.
Celso Amorim: Well, thank you very much. This
puts us Brazilians in a very comfortable position
because you’re in favor of total and complete
disarmament. So, thank you very much.
