Entrevista concedida pelo Ministro das
Relações Exteriores, Embaixador Celso
Amorim, ao jornalista Stephen Sackur, do
programa “Hard Talk” (BBC World Service),
em 20 de setembro de 2005
(versão em inglês)
Stephen Sackur: Today Hard Talk is in New
York city home of the United Nations still dominated
by the big five permanent members of the Security
Council. But just how tenable is that status quo? Well,
my guest today is the Foreign Minister of Brazil, a
country now determined to flex its muscle on the
international stage.
Celso Amorim, welcome to Hard Talk.
Celso Amorim (Brazilian Foreign
Minister): Thank you.
SS: Why does Brazil want a seat, a permanent
seat, on the UN Security Council?
CA: First, I think this has a history and I
think it was reminded by Jack Straw last year. Brazil
was already considered a candidate in forty five.
President Roosevelt wanted Brazil to be on the
Security Council, for different reasons that didn’t
happen then.
I think now it’s a question not so much of
Brazil wanting but the need to change the Security
Council and to have developing countries there.
SS: In the past you’ve written about the moral
case for reform of the Security Council, what do
you mean moral case?
CA: It’s a moral and political case, I would
say, in the sense that you need to have a legitimacy
for the decisions of the Security Council because it
has to be able to take the decisions quickly, that’s
important too, but the other thing is that decisions
should be followed by a majority of the countries.
SS: But you’re, you’re suggesting that there
is no legitimacy to the current decisions taken ...
CA: No ...
SS: ... by the Security Council?
CA: I’m not a political science although I did
study in England political science but, you know, there
is the, let us say, the legal sense of legitimacy. Of course
there is a legal legitimacy but there is also something
called the political legitimacy and in order for the
countries to feel that their views are being represented
it’s important that you have a fair representation in
the Security Council. Not ...
SS: In making your ...
CA: ... the one that emerged from the Second
World War, that’s long ago.
SS: ... and in making your case for an expanded Security Council you’ve basically teamed
up with Japan, India, Germany is it your belief, your
perception that Brazil carries as much weight in the
world if not more as Japan, India, Germany?
CA: It’s other people’s who have perception.
If they think. I think it’s normal in Brazil ...
SS: But I’m interested to, to pin down what
you and your president ... believe to be Brazil’s
rightful place in the world.
CA: The comparative advantage that Brazil
has, if you wish, is the capacity to work out the
problems peacefully, its own problems and other
people’s problems and I think that’s the best possible
contribution. I give you one example. We have
borders with ten countries. I think we are the second
or third country in terms of neighbours. We haven’t
had a war for a hundred and thirty years. So that’s a
good example.
And we have helped in many other situations
with diplomacy. Some times also the presence of
Brazilian troops but mostly with diplomacy in Africa,
in Latin America, in Haiti now, many, many situations.
SS: Let me quote to you the words of
Nicholas Burns, one of the top officials at the State
Department, he said recently quote, ‘We have to be
concerned about the effectiveness of the Security
Council. We believe an intake of nine or ten
countries’, which is the sort of proposal you’re putting
forward, ‘is not easily digestible by the Council. We
wouldn’t be able to be assured of the Council’s
continued effectiveness’.
CA: Well may be it’s not digestible by those
who want to keep power only for themselves. I reply
to that question when I say I think you have to
consider effectiveness from two angles. One is the
ability to take decisions. It may be if you had only
one country that would be even easier. On the other
hand you have to take the capacity of the world
community to follow, to abide by those decisions. In
that respect I think an intake of nine or ten can help
quite a lot.
SS: A clear implication of what you’ve just
458
said is that you believe the Americans are trying to
preserve their domination of the United Nations
Security Council?
CA: I’m not saying the Americans, you are
saying the Americans, but I’m saying that the countries
that want to prevent the enlargement of the Security
Council, whatever the reasons that they give, in
practice that’s what they’re doing.
SS: The fact is your desire for reform is not
going to be fulfilled is it?
CA: I think it will. Not my desire I think it’s,
as I said before, it’s the need for the change of the
Security Council, that will happen. The President of
the General Assembly has mentioned that, the
Swedish Prime Minister, that any reform will be
incomplete if you don’t enlarge the Security Council.
The Secretary ...
SS: Have you talked to ...
CA: ... General have said that, I mean, it’s
not my perception, not Brazil’s perception. You may
vote for other countries actually if you choose but
one thing is clear: you can’t have the world of a
hundred and ninety odd countries with the same
amount of permanent members as you had when the
war was over.
SS: ... have you talked to Condoleezza Rice
about this?
CA: I have talked on and off with her yes.
SS: What does she say?
CA: I didn’t talk to her very, very recently,
but we talked before, and the Americans when they
came to Brazil, both Colin Powell and herself said
that Brazil has solid credentials but we have to see
and let us see. These will continue, these are ...
SS: They’re not, they’re not enthusiastic at
all are they?
CA: ... may be they are not enthusiastic but,
actually, the reform of Security Council would be useful
for them and I think a country like Brazil is able to build
bridges that some times other countries can not.
I have seen for instance very polarised
situations. When I was here as ambassador in the question of Iraq and we did build bridges between
the US, the UK almost on the one side, China, Russia
and France on the other side. I think Brazil has that
capacity. I don’t know why, you can ask why. We
think that we have a bigger capacity than others of
building bridges. I actually don’t know but it’s part
may be of the national ...
SS: Well we’ll address, we’ll address whether
that’s actually true ...
CA: ... national characteristic ...
SS: ... in a moment but, but just to stick to
this point about the Security Council would you agree
that at the moment it is the central plank of Brazil’s
foreign policy?
CA: No.
SS: It seems to many people inside Brazil to
have become a preoccupation.
CA: Because it’s may be more polemic. So
it engenders more discussion. Brazil first priority is
integration of South America, changing the trade
geography, as we have been doing, fifty two per cent
of our trade now is with developing countries. Latin
America became our largest trading partner in the
last year. Continuing discussions with Europe and
United States and the WTO and so on ...
SS: Well ...
CA: ... We can’t, we ...
SS: ... there’s a long list there but I’m
interested in your first ...
CA: ... we can’t be reductionist.
SS: ... your first point was that your priority
is integration with the rest of South America .
CA: Yes.
SS: ... why is it then that the rest of South
America doesn’t even appear to back Brazil’s claim
to a permanent seat on the Security Council?
CA: No. A great majority of the countries do
back Brazil.
SS: Argentina, Mexico.
CA: Mexico’s not South America to start with
but, anyway, Argentina has a historic position, we
respect that. The same kind of differences exist in
Europe you know and that doesn’t prevent Europe
to be integrated ...
SS: So ...
CA: ... I mean, as far as know at least so far
Italy doesn’t support Germany but we have to respect
each country’s views.
SS: Despite the feelings of many inside the
United Nations in New York you say that reform is
coming, when is it coming?
CA: I don’t have a crystal ball so I can’t really
be sure on that but world history, as you know very
well, is not made in one day. We have to profit from
the momentum that exists now so I would hope we
can have a deal the end of the year but if it has an
over flow, if it goes to the beginning of next year that
will not be tragic.
SS: By the end of the year you say and how
many new members in the expanded council do you
think there’ll be?
CA: The proposal of the G-4 provides for
six new permanent members without a veto.
SS: Without a veto?
CA: Without a veto.
SS: Let’s widen the discussion, Brazil’s
foreign policy generally. Clearly you and your
president want Brazil to play a very active role on the
world stage.
CA: Yes.
SS: Why?
CA: It’s an interesting question because it is
the second time I’m foreign minister and the first time
that I was foreign minister about ten years ago or so
people would ask the opposite question; why Brazil
doesn’t play a bigger role in international politics.
Actually it was, I think, the American expression was
that Brazil was punching below its weight or something
like that.
I think that the world has become globalised
as we all know. We are effected by things that happen
in Iraq, in the Middle East, wherever, and I think if
we can have an influence and if the influence can be a
peaceful one fine. And I think also in matters of, that relate to trade, if you’ll allow me a minute, for instance
Brazil was instrumental to the creation of the G-20 in
the WTO and I think this is probably the most important
thing that happened in the politics of world trade in the
last few years. I say that without any false modesty.
SS: To be specific when it comes to trade,
when it comes to economics Brazil wants to create a
new pole of power in the world, a pole of power
which can effectively stand up to the United States ...
CA: Yes.
SS: ... and to Europe?
CA: Well let us say not stand to but we, we ...
SS: Well that’s exactly what’s been happening
when it comes to trade issues particularly.
CA: ... aye in the negotiation yes but I think
in the end we have been very useful and everybody
recognises that for instance when we arrived at the
framework last July in Geneva after ten months, ten
months after Cancun every one recognised the role
of the G-20. It’s not Brazil alone by the way it’s Brazil,
India, South Africa, Argentina and many others.
SS: But do you think it’s really useful to pose
as the bastion of a new rival pole of power to the
United States in particular?
CA: Oh that may be is your perception it’s
not my perception and I don’t think it’s the US
perception, at least the US Government perception.
It might have been in the moment in Cancun because
there was a pre-cooked agreement between the US
and European Union and it would be easier for
everyone to, to approve the agreement. But once that
didn’t happen I think we see Brazil and the G-20 as
very useful partners for a, for a trade agreement.
SS: It’s easy to see why the Americans would
begin to believe that Brazil has aspirations to become
the leader of a rival pole of power. President Lula
quote ‘Brazil had to stop viewing itself as a small
country, as a humble, Third World country very
dependent on relations with the US and Europe, very
concerned over what it could and could not do
because the wealthy might not like it. Our basic
principle is respect but we like to get it as well as give
460
it and we’ve proved that Brazil can be as
internationally respected as any other country’. Very
interesting quote ...
CA: Very good quote actually. .
SS: ... what he’s doing and what you are doing
is giving a clear message to Washington that you will
not be pushed around any more because you feel
you have been.
CA: Well it may be to Washington, it may be
to Brussels, it may be to any where, I mean, we, we
don’t, we don’t want to be pushed and we don’t
want to push. But let’s ...
SS: Is that why you’ve organised for example
a South America / Arab World summit?
CA: Well I think that has several reasons. It’s
not actually to defy any one but I think it’s, it is why
should we look to the Arab world that there are ten
million people in Brazil who are descendants from Arabs,
why should we look to the Arab world through the eyes
of the Americans or through the eyes of the, of Europe?
I mean if we can look directly and vice versa. So I think
there is a mutual discovery then and I can tell you that’s
very pragmatic. Our trade with them almost, let us say,
increased by sixty per cent in two years.
SS: Pragmatic you say some would call it
clumsy particularly when in February of 2005 you
chose to go to the Middle East, you visited Jordan,
you spent time with the Palestinians in Ramallah, you
did not stop at all in Israel and the Israelis noticed
and so did the Americans.
CA: Well let me say ...
SS: It’s clumsy.
CA: ... clumsy? Well it’s your evaluation, I’ll
not defend, I’ll not be defending my own abilities as
a diplomat. What I can say at that, at that stage not
as a justification, because I don’t think that needs to
be justified in any way, but what we were doing at
that stage was preparing the summit. Israel was not a
participant in the summit nor was the United States
so that’s why I, I went to these countries. Nor, nor
did I go to Iran for instance which was all, also in the
Middle East but it’s not Arab country. Having said that after the summit I went to
Israel, I talked ...
SS: Because they were very angry ...
CA: ... no, well ...
SS: ... that you’d snubbed them before.
CA: ... well I talk to everybody, I received
the amount of attention that was of, of country, no, I
mean, if the summit, it took may be two per cent of
the whole discussions, it was, was not even mentioned
by the Foreign Minister and I spoke with Sharon, I
spoke with the Foreign Minster, I spoke with, with
the Vice - Prime Ministers, Simon Perez said Brazil
was a, a country very well placed even to help. And
I always was very clear.
When I went to Syria for instance I told them
we, we are friends of the Israel and will continue to
be friends with Israel. So there, there is no, you know,
of course you can probably distort some action and
see under a certain prism, I’m not saying that you do
that, but sometimes people do that.
SS: But to be clear you don’t regret that
decision not to go to Israel ...
CA: No, no, no ...
SS: ... and which, of course, frustrated and
disappointed them?.
CA: ... and I went there later and was so
well received actually that shows...
SS: ... another aspect of this theme that I’m
developing about Brazil’s aspirations on the world
stage you’re spending millions and millions of dollars
opening up new embassies in, in the developing world
aren’t you?
CA: Do you know how much a Brazilian
embassy costs, I think it may cost maybe two hundred
thousand dollars a year or something like that ...
SS: But when people in Brazil question
President Lula as to the expenditure he said it’s
justified and he said look the US already has its flag
flying in all of these countries.
CA: ... that’s true, you know ten years ago,
so I can say something that can be even used as self
criticism if you wish because I’m also very capable
of self criticism and it’s very useful from time to time.
Ten years ago I was Foreign Minister, eleven years
ago, and I said we have to open an Embassy in
(indistinct) because that’s the only Portuguese
speaking country, East Timor was not independent
then, where we don’t have an embassy. And some
times they were, some time in the future they will
discover oil in (indistinct). They did, we did not have
an embassy now we have. So we were late. Let me
tell you one thing it’s not my ...
SS: But is it really useful always to compare
yourself with the US and say if they have embassies
in these tiny developing countries we should have one
too ...
CA: ... it’s, it’s, well it’s a brotherly country,
you know Brazil is very proud of the fact that we
have probably half of our population of African origin.
We are the second biggest population of African
origin in the world. I mean we are more than the
United States, only Nigeria has more African
descendants than, than Brazil. So I think it is only
natural. These, this month of August I think we had
eleven leaders including Presidents and Prime
Ministers and Foreign Ministers who went to Brazil.
We didn’t make any, let us say, calling, convocation,
I mean they went there because they feel, they feel
well in Brazil and we feel well in Africa. I think it’s
only natural.
SS: The problem ...
CA: I, we are not a colonial power so I don’t
know if the colonial powers are worried that we go
there but we’ll, we’ll go.
SS: ... but the problem we keep coming back
to is that you, you have this level of aspiration on the
world stage, you pose as the leaders of the South
American bloc and yet time and again it seems you
do not have the support of your own neighbours. To
quote Candido Glibowski, member of the World
Social Forum’s International Council, he said recently
in an article quote ‘Brazil’s global ambition is madness,
the product of ‘quote’, the old nationalist militarism
and the dream of becoming a great power which is possibly generating negative effects like tension,
renewed tension with Argentina’.
CA: Well we respect anyone’s opinions,
Brazil’s position is very peaceful. We don’t, we don’t
expand military bases or anything around the world
so I think it’s totally out of order to think that we, are
let us say off the target, to think that we want to have
a militaristic, nationalistic, it’s totally different.
Actually, I don’t want and I don’t like to
speak of leadership but since we’re here the leadership
of President Lula has been sought very often and we
have asked to be more present in Africa. That’s what
we see, it’s not only that Brazil wants to go there it’s
that many people want us to be there and in South
America, let me tell you again, it’s very pragmatic.
The region where our trade has grown more,
especially our export, has been South America, it’s,
in two years it’s almost double. That, that’s something
which never happened before.
SS: Isn’t there a, a very difficult irony for you
being the Foreign Minister of Brazil which is so keen
to reach out to play a much bigger role on the world
stage while at the same time your Government, your
ruling party back home is, is falling apart?
CA: Well we have a political crisis there’s
nothing, we can’t hide that but this is being, let us say,
dealt with the proper way, the democratic way. The
Congress, the, the what you call it, the equivalent of
your Attorney General and all these are actively
working. People are being condemned if they have
to be condemned in a democratic way ...
SS: You ...
CA: ... so I think this in, in the end will
reinforce the democratic credentials of Brazil. The
fact that the institute...
SS: You’re a, you’re a ...
CA: ... the institutions are working as they
should work.
SS: His popularity, President Lula, has
dropped from sixty six per cent at the beginning of
this year to fifty per cent or below now, thirty nine
per cent of Brazilians say they would not vote for him
462
now under any circumstances, makes it difficult for this
Government to operate with credibility doesn’t it?
CA: Well I think a, a of course there are
difficulties, I’m not saying there are not, I think on the
other hand what President Lula is doing in the social
field is so important, never done in Brazil before, the
amount of transfer of income to, Brazil is the most
unequal, one of the most unequal countries in the
world ...
SS: It’s the second, second most unequal
country in the world.
CA: ... well you see, so, and President Lula
is really working to diminish this inequality and
SS: Fifty per cent of the wealth is held by ten
per cent of the people ...
CA: ... indeed, indeed ...
SS: ... President Lula is supposed to have
changed this system instead we find he’s mired in
corruption scandals.
CA: ... no, no, no he’s changing and that hurts
those who don’t want to see Brazil change.
SS: Do you think he’s let, do you think he’s
let Brazil down?
CA: No I don’t think so, I think on the
contrary, I think President Lula continues to, to elicit
a lot of hope and I think when all this has cleared
and, of course, it will be very clear that he is not
involved, and all those who have to be punished are
punished in the democratic way with the full right of
defence which is, that’s something that democracy
also presuppose, not only, only condemned by, by
the media by this or that but condemned by the proper
due process. When all of them are tried and the things
have finished I’m sure that President Lula will emerge
as a great leader that he is, respected not only in Brazil
but internationally.
SS: Of course there’s not only poverty and
inequality which you’ve acknowledged which is a
huge problem in Brazil ...
CA: No I have not, yes ...
SS: ... it’s also, if I may continue, it’s also the
violence, the levels of gun violence in Brazil and the levels of Police violence inflicted on the civilian
population. For example over five hundred people in
Rio de Janeiro alone, in the first six months of this
year, shot dead by the Police. Sal Paulo a hundred
and fifteen complaints of Police shooting civilians in
the first six months of this year. And yet ...
CA: I don’t want to speak about Police,
Police violence so much in the world but any way if
you ask for the first time in Brazil there was a big
drop in violent death and this ...
SS: Big drop from totally unacceptable to still
totally unacceptable.
CA: ... well that, that was the history of
inequality ...
SS: But my point which ...
CA: ... the history of inequality in Brazil we
don’t want to, we don’t want to hide history .
SS: ... I just, I just ...
CA: ... Brazil was a country that had slavery
until 1889 now we have a Minister, a Cabinet Minister
for combating racial discrimination, for combating
gender discrimination. Now that’s why President Lula
is not so loved by so, by some people...
SS: ... but what I was coming to was setting out
the context for your intervention in a tragic event that
happened in London in the wake of the London bombings
...
CA: Come on, come on that’s totally different.
I mean we have had problems of Police violence, we
have called the, the report, human rights rapporteur
for extra judicial execution, he went to Brazil he spoke
with everyone. Brazil’s a ...
SS: But let’s, let’s just, let’s just ...
CA: ... no let me finish, no, no, no, you know,
wait a moment we are a poor country, we have
problems, we have problems, we’re still a developing
country but these are illegal acts that are being
combated in Brazil. We are not trying to justify them,
(indistinct) to say that’s the correct way to combat
crime or anything else ...
SS: But when a, when a Brazilian ...
CA: ... so it’s a totally different situation when
...
SS: ... well let’s ...
CA: ... you would try to justify the killing, I’m
not saying and I have, we are having a good cooperation
of the British authorities so I don’t want to question that
but I, I think it’s different when we try to justify the killing
of an innocent, we have never tried to justify it. But Brazil
is a poor country it has its problems.
SS: ... but let, just so that people understand
we are now talking about the shooting ...
CA: They, it would be a good excuse but I
don’t think I ...
SS: ... death of a Brazilian citizen ...
CA: ... all the British authorities to whom I
have spoken to didn’t have resort to this argument
because it’s a bad argument, it’s a tabloid argument
that, that doesn’t stand the level of the BBC.
SS: ... the only argument, the only argument,
the only argument which I, I’m, I’m not making but
which Amnesty International for one pointed out was
that your very quick intervention in, in the tragic death
of Jean Charles des Menezes was a counter point to
the fact that as Amnesty International say Brazil, quote,
‘Can not pick and choose cases based on the publicity
they receive. The Government does not show the
same care, the same approach at home ...
CA: You see I, I’m, I am the Foreign Minister
of Brazil I have to deal with things that happen that
effect our relations with other countries or happen or
effect in Brazilians in other countries. Brazil is doing
what it can in a very unequal society which came from
a very bad basis and we have one of the best
campaigns of disarmament in the world which is
working. Police officials even have been put in prison
in a great number in the last few years in all areas
including environment, all areas. So I don’t think this
is argument is good because it doesn’t do justice to
the good way that I have been treated and the good,
at least the attempt to be transparent that the Police,
that the UK authorities have had with Brazil.
SS: Do you think, do you think that the family
of Mr. de Menezes  will get some form of justice
from the British authorities? CA: Well justice would be bringing him to
life so I don’t think that’s possible but I think they will
get some sort of compensation, I believe that. And
the Brazilian public opinion also will get some sort of
compensation when those who are found guilty, if they
are found guilty, are also punished in a proper way.
Everybody speaks of impunity so I think we are
always shown the finger of what we should do, we’re
not trying to but in this particular we are, we are
effected, a Brazilian was effected in a brutal manner
for something that we didn’t he anything to do with
neither Brazil nor him personally, I think that has to
be (indistinct) ...
SS: I suppose ...
CA: ... has to be put right.
SS: ... I suppose all I was getting at and am
getting at ...
CA: And I’m sure it will be because Jack
Straw promised me that, all the British authorities that
I have spoken to have been very cooperative and I
want to ...
SS: ... but I want to pose the ...
CA: ... stress that point as well.
SS: ... the underlying point of much of, of what
we’ve been discussing is whether Brazil’s ability to
project on, on the international stage is undermined
by the profound problems that you’ve acknowledged
Brazil has at home?
CA: Well all of use some how are effected,
it’s true of any country I’m sorry to say, but I think
also other countries that have many other problems
have been, Brazil is a democracy. We are, are
working hard to be more and more of a racial
democracy, a real one, substantively one not only
legally that we have been for a long time. We work
peacefully, we don’t have any, any problem with any
of our neighbours so this is the kind, these are kind
of, our country that we want to project; democratic,
peaceful and, and turn to social justice.
SS: Celso Amorim thank you very much for
being on Hard Talk.
CA: My pleasure.
