CONSELHO DE SEGURANÇA DAS NAÇÕES UNIDAS
DISCURSO DO MINISTRO DAS RELAÇÕES EXTERIORES,
ANTONIO PATRIOTA, NO DEBATE SOBRE DIPLOMACIA
PREVENTIVA DO CONSELHO DE SEGURANÇA DAS NAÇÕES
UNIDAS (CSNU). (NOVA YORK/EUA, 22/09/2011)
Mr. President,
Distinguished Heads of State,
Distinguished Ministers, Ambassadors,
Let me start by expressing my satisfaction
at seeing Your Excellency preside over the
Security Council.
I would like to convey President Dilma
Rousseff’s regret at being unable to attend
today’s debate. She requested that I transmit
to you, Mr. President, her respectful greetings
and her congratulations for having chosen this
important topic for our High Level Meeting.
The subject of this session allows us to
call attention to the diplomatic instruments
available for the promotion of peace, in a
world where we often witness a tendency
to hasten towards coercion, sanctions and
military intervention.
Today’s debate helps us to underline the
priority role that the pacific settlement of
disputes must have in achieving the central
goal of the United Nations, which is the
promotion of international peace on the legal
basis provided by the Charter.
Brazil has inscribed the principle of
peaceful resolution of controversies into its
Constitution. We believe that peace results
from collective efforts in favor of building
just societies. We have underscored the
interdependence between peace, security, and
development. We know from experience that
stability and security are seldom achieved
where there is social exclusion. I was
particularly pleased to hear Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon’s comment yesterday, when he
stated that “development is ultimately the best
prevention”.
The promotion of socio-economic
development and the creation of political
opportunities to allow every country to fulfill
its potential are indispensable elements in any
agenda for preventive diplomacy, by extension
in any agenda for peace.
In Brazil, we are committed to fighting
poverty and improving governance. In our
region, the Union of South American Nations
- UNASUL - is consolidating itself as a zone
of peace, cooperation, and democracy.
We know, however, that irrespective of how
developed regional cooperation becomes, we
will always need a functional and effective
multilateral system. And it cannot be repeated
too often that this Council has the primary
responsibility for promoting international
peace and security.
It behooves the Security Council to find solutions that can both resolve the challenges
posed by specific situations of crisis and, at
the same time, strengthen the multilateral
system itself.
Recent episodes have shown us the limits
of military action as a means for promoting
stability, as well as the inappropriateness of
using force preventively or preemptively.
Yesterday, we took note of President Obama’s
statement to the effect that “the tide of war is
receding”. We might emphatically add that we
must usher in a tide of diplomacy, dialogue
and prevention.
Members of the Security Council,
Prevention of conflicts and prevention of
the escalation of conflict can be strengthened
through many different tools. Peacekeeping
operations are valuable instruments. The
Peacebuilding Commission can play an
important role in staving off the recurrence
of conflict. I agree with the Prime-Minister
of Portugal when he speaks of the mutually
reinforcing triad of prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. But let us not forget that
disarmament and the elimination of weapons
of mass destruction will also greatly enhance
our capacity to avoid conflict.
Meanwhile we would not disagree with
those who associate poverty and conflict and
tension. Let us not forget that historically it is
the very powerful militarily that have wrought
destruction on the widest scale.
As many have pointed out today, in order
to fully discharge its role in the field of
peace and security, the United Nations must
support and promote women’s participation in
national and international political processes.
President Dilma Rousseff stressed our
commitment to this goal in her speech to the
General Assembly yesterday. Unfortunately
however women are still underrepresented
in the different stages and activities of the
diplomatic agenda for peace.
42
Mr. President,
We live in a time marked by mass
demonstrations in the Arab world, where
a young generation demands effective
participation in the political future of their
countries and societies. From the beginning,
Brazil has not only stood with those who call
for freedom of expression and institutional
progress, but has also steadfastly promoted
peaceful means to address the tensions brought
about by these processes. At the same time, we
have called for respect for international law
and underlined the need to fully respect the
decisions of the Security Council, in particular
when Chapter VII has been invoked.
Fulfilling our responsibility in the realm of
prevention involves favoring mediation, the
good offices of the Secretary-General and, at
all times, giving priority to the full range of
instruments to peacefully resolve differences,
including giving due consideration to regional
organizations and refraining from loose
interpretations of Security Council mandates.
I think the Council deserves to take careful
note of the statement by President Zuma of
South Africa when he mentioned the fact that
the African Union was widely sidelined in
recent situations that have been brought to the
attention of the Council.
The wave of change that has swept the
Middle East and Northern Africa lends an
even greater sense of urgency to the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people for a State
of their own. Defusing this enormous focus
of tension and instability through a two-state
solution and through due respect for Israel’s
right to live in peace and security can indeed
and should be portrayed as a form of advancing
the concept of preventive diplomacy. The
exercise of preventive diplomacy requires
that this Council participate effectively in
defusing tensions of varying degrees of
intensity. In other words, the Council will not be fulfilling its role if it avoids the potentially
most destabilizing situations.
Let us not forget that Resolutions 242 and
338 were consensus decisions of this body and
remain inescapable references for the future
of peace in the Middle East. Brazil expresses
its expectation that the Security Council will
show greater leadership in helping to bring
about, through dialogue and diplomacy, a just
and lasting peace to the Middle East. And as
President Sarkozy stated yesterday “il faut
arrêter de croire qu’un seul pays, fut-il le plus
grand, ou qu’un petit groupe de pays peuvent
résoudre un problème d’une telle complexité.
Trop d’acteurs majeurs sont laissés de côté
pour pouvoir aboutir”.
Mr. President,
Updating the composition of the Security
Council in order to better reflect the realities
of the world today will greatly contribute to
the strengthening of our preventive capacity.
Meanwhile,
dialogue,
persuasion,
diplomacy and the peaceful resolution of
conflicts will continue to be the guiding
principles of my country’s conduct in this
Council and this Organization, where our
collective responsibility will require that
additional and more sustained efforts be
invested in prevention as a broad approach
towards lasting peace.
Thank you very much.
