Palavras iniciais do Ministro de Estado das
Relações Exteriores, Embaixador Celso
Amorim, por ocasião de conferência de
imprensa realizada na sede da Organização
Mundial de Comércio (Genebra, Suíça, em
29.6.2006)
Good afternoon,
It is always a pleasure being here with the
media that covers the WTO and trade matters.
Reminds me of some old days in which I was younger,
maybe two rounds back. In any case, I want, first of
all, to clarify that I am speaking on behalf of Brazil
alone and not speaking on behalf of any group,
although I may incidentally mention some of the
conclusions or the discussions that we had in groups,
specially in the G-20.
As all you know, this is still the first day that
Ministers who came to Geneva are here, so we’ve
had until now some sort of preliminary talks. I myself
had meetings yesterday with Susan Schwab, from
the United States, and today with Peter Mandelson,
but, most importantly, I had a meeting of the G-20.
There was also a meeting of the NAMA-11, in which
I could participate only for a short while, because I
had to have other bilateral meetings with members of
the G-20 at the same time.
As you know, we are coming to – it is rather
a common place to say – a crucial moment in these
negotiations, but this is indeed one of the moments in
which we will have to face some facts and take some
decisions. My general impression is that we are not
getting very much nearer to the result that we need,
although I find, should I put in that way, good will on
the part of the negotiators on the different sides, but
somehow the gaps don’t seem to diminish. If I look
backwards, maybe two or three months ago – that
may be partially a question of perception, not only a
question of fact – but I have the impression that the
gaps have actually widened or at least have become
more rigid. So, we have a very hard task to face in
the next few days. Pascal Lamy will have a very hard
task to face himself, but all of us who represent
554
different countries or groups of countries will have a
hard task to face.
I could comment in a more general way that,
of course, and you read that in the communiqués both
of the G-20 and of the NAMA-11 – I don’t want to
go into the technical details of each of these
communiqués –, but there is a disappointment in
relation to what the developed countries have done
or indicated that they can do. I would express that
basically by saying that there was a kind of an
attempeted reversal of, I should say, the burden of
leadership, as if offers by developing countries could
do the trick of encouraging the developed countries
to do what they need to do for the Round to be
successful. That is not to deny that all of us participate,
saved of course the LDCs and saved of course the
exceptions for vulnerable economies and so on, but
we know that all of us have to do our part in these
negotiations, all of us will have to make concessions
of one way or another, but of course this will have to
be proportionate first to our power, second to the
capacity that we all have to change the world economy
and certainly because this Round has been from the
beginning a development Round and an agricultural
Round. It is basically in relation to development and
agriculture that the main movements have to be made.
I am not saying that in other areas – NAMA, services
– movements should not be made. Probably they
should and they will, but the real encouragement and
the real leadership have to come from the richer part
of the world, and we actually haven’t seen enough of
that.
Of course there are moments in which it
seemed that one part of the developed world was
more resistant. There are other moments in which
you think that other part of the developed world was
more resistant. Sometimes both parties – because I
am speaking of the biggest two – seem to blame each
other. Some other times they seem to be blaming the
developing countries, which is specially illogical and
unfair. But the elements of an agreement are not yet
there – I don’t see them – and unless something very positive – but also unexpected – happens in these
two or three days, my hopes of having some kind of
concrete result from these days are rather scarce.
Having said that, I don’t mean that we can’t
make progress and I think we should get nearer to a
situation in which a final agreement can be achieved,
but that would require a degree of leadership on the
part of the rich countries and of course of the leaders
of rich countries which we haven’t seen so far.
President Lula, as you know, has been personally
engaged in discussing with the leaders – all of them
seem to be very much disposed to finish the round,
all of them seem to understand the importance of the
round not only from a commercial point of view, but
also from a broader political point of view and, as
we have said, sometimes the best way to combat
terrorism proliferation and so on is to combat poverty,
and the most immediate way to combat poverty is
having a better deal in terms of free trade.
