Reunião Ministerial da OCDE
Discurso do Ministro das Relações Exteriores, Embaixador
Celso Amorim, durante Reunião Ministerial da OCDE,
sobre a Rodada Doha, em Paris, França, no dia 4 de maio
de 2005
Thank you, Mr Chairman,
It is always a pleasure to come here to the
OECD, which we learnt to appreciate also as a centre
for reflection not only on the problems that affect its
own members, but also on the problems that all of us in
the world - particularly in the developing world - face.
I still remember the days when I worked at
the Ministry of Science and Technology, how
important the studies of the OECD were for us.
Mr Chairman,
Let me first of all say that of course we are
here today because we give a great importance to
trade as an instrument for development. I think it is
very clear from the performance of many of our
countries, including my own, how much trade can
help in solving the problems of growth and
employment.
We do see that we can operate at several
levels in the question of trade. My own country has
been active in trade agreements within our region,
more specifically in South America, more broadly in
the Americas and other areas, as in relation to Europe,
and with other developing countries, which are not
an unimportant part of our recent trade dealings, such
as with India and the South African Customs Union.
These have been part of our effort to diversify
our trade goals, and this has paid in a very important
way. I don’t want to bother you with statistics but it is
very telling that our exports grew by a quite significant
amount and our trade now shows an even balance
between different regions and categories of countries.
We know that there is no substitute for the
multilateral trade negotiations, because it is only
through multilateral trade negotiations that we will be
able to address the main problems that beset our
countries. For one, the question of subsidies and,
namely, the agricultural subsidies, which are probably
the single most distorting element in world trade. This
is a question that we will not be able to solve in bilateral
dealings with developed or developing countries or
in any kind of regional discussion or negotiation, but
only in the WTO.
I agree with my friend Rob Portman - and I
welcome him as I do with Peter Mandelson for I think
this his first time that he is here - when he says that
market access in agriculture is essential. But we all
have to learn that market access in agriculture will
not be sufficiently pushed if there is no solution for
the question of subsidies. In a way, although the
biggest benefits - as the World Bank has shown -
will come probably from the market access opening,
these are inextricably linked to the question of
domestic and export subsidies.
This is what we hope we will be able to
address.
There are other areas as well. As it has been
said several times, the Doha Development Agenda
(DDA) is not about agriculture alone. I am very thankful that my thought was mentioned here that
indeed agriculture is the engine, is the locomotive of
this round. And if the locomotive stalls, nothing else
will move. This is one thing that has to be clear.
We of course have other interests, like anti-
dumping. We are also very interested in the
development dimension. Sometimes I am a bit afraid
that the development dimension is seen only as a
concept to be applied to LDCs or to very small
economies. We are the first to recognise the special
situation of LDCs and weak economies. In all the
bilateral dealings in which Brazil has entered with not
only LDCs but with countries that have more vulnerable
or small economies than Brazil we have applied the
principle of asymmetry. We have applied the principle
of asymmetry together with Argentina in Mercosul
vis-à-vis our smaller partners. But we cannot accept
that the development dimension that is enshrined in
the title of the DDA is only about LDCs. It is also
about the broader dimension of development for all
countries.
In this respect, I would also say that another
important aspect of DDA is flexibility for development
policies. This is something that somehow we
renounced to an extent at the Uruguay Round. At the
time, the prevailing ideology was a different one. If
you opened your markets unilaterally, everything
146
would happen automatically. And this was not the
case. So, we do need some flexibility in terms of social
policy, technological policy and industrial policy. We
have got something in terms of social policy for
instance in the question of TRIPs and medicaments,
and I hope we will be able to do a similar thing when
we address questions like TRIMs or the relation
between the bio-diversity convention and TRIPS.
Mr Chairman,
I think the WTO is very rich and very creative
in always coming up with new names and acronyms.
If one spends three or four months outside Geneva,
one seems to be lost because the names are totally
new. The name in vogue now is “gateway”, and I
think sometimes the gateway is not seen as a passage,
as something you go through, but as an obstacle. The
problem of the AVEs that was mentioned here before
is precisely one of these cases. This was not a
gateway that was there. It was a block that was put
on our road, as the road was unimpeded. So, I would
hope that since people are so creative - especially in
the OECD circles, where much more is spent in terms
of research and development and in intellectual
programmes than we can do in our countries - that
this creativity should be used not to invent new
problems but find solutions.
Thank you very much.
