Entrevista coletiva conjunta à imprensa,
concedida por ocasião da visita ao Brasil da
Secretária de Estado dos EUA, Condoleezza
Rice, em 26 de abril de 2005
Porta-voz: Boa tarde. Passarei a palavra ao
Ministro das Relações Exteriores, Embaixador Celso
Amorim, e à Secretária de Estado dos EUA,
Condoleezza Rice, para que façam declarações
introdutórias à imprensa.
Em seguida, o Chanceler Amorim e a
Secretária Rice responderão a quatro perguntas,
dentre os jornalistas presentes.
Chanceler Amorim: Boa tarde. Na verdade,
quase boa noite. Eu gostaria de, em primeiro lugar,
dar publicamente também as boas vindas à Secretária
de Estado Condoleezza Rice, nesta sua primeira visita
ao Brasil, na qualidade de Secretária de Estado.
Sabemos que aqui ela esteve antes em outras
capacidades. Eu queria dizer que a visita,
evidentemente, terá vários outros pontos, inclusive,
dentro de não muito tempo, estaremos partindo para
o Palácio do Planalto, onde será recebida pelo
Presidente da República. Mas eu gostaria de me
referir principalmente à conversa que mantivemos e
salientar alguns pontos.
Conversamos sobre a importância de os
nossos dois países, que têm uma grande afinidade
em questões relativas à democracia e à mudança
social, continuarem a trabalhar juntos, para, de
maneira respeitosa da soberania dos países, trabalhar
juntos, eu repito, para favorecer a democracia,
sobretudo no nosso próprio continente.
Mencionamos várias situações em que temos
cooperado e que pretendemos continuar a cooperar.
Mencionamos também questões comerciais; salientamos
a importância da cooperação dos nossos dois países
na OMC. Todos sabemos que a OMC é de grande
importância tanto para o Brasil quanto para os Estados
Unidos. Salientamos, mais uma vez, concordarmos em
que os nossos interesses são em grande medida comuns
– talvez não integralmente, mas, em grande parte, sim –
nas questões da OMC e, certamente, no que diz respeito
ao reforço do sistema multilateral do comércio e ao êxito
da Rodada de Doha.
No âmbito comercial, mencionamos,
também, a idéia de voltarmos a dar ímpeto às
negociações da ALCA, dentro do quadro que foi
acordado em Miami; discutimos as razões pelas quais
as negociações da ALCA não puderam avançar tanto
nos últimos meses e, de qualquer forma,
concordamos em que é importante voltarmos a dar
energia a essas negociações, respeitando,
naturalmente, os cronogramas que se colocarão em
função de outras negociações em que também
estamos envolvidos.
Nesse contexto, também aproveitei para explicar um pouco – não que ela necessitasse
explicações, mas, digamos, para expandir um pouco
as explicações – os processos de integração sul-
americana e a importância que esses processos têm,
não apenas para o desenvolvimento econômico dos
países da América do Sul, mas até mesmo para a
consolidação democrática, para a consolidação plena
da democracia nesses países. Conversamos sobre
alguns outros temas da realidade mundial e também
sobre a questão da reforma das Nações Unidas. Diria
que, no plano conceitual, sem sermos
necessariamente específicos, compartilhamos idéias
semelhantes.
Eu diria que, em resumo, foram esses os temas
que nós tratamos. Tratamos também de outras iniciativas
da nossa diplomacia e da diplomacia norte-americana.
No caso da diplomacia brasileira, conversamos também
sobre a Cúpula de Países Árabes e da América do Sul,
os seus objetivos, a idéia de que o que nós vamos fazer
está voltado essencialmente para a cooperação, mas
que se puder ajudar também no processo de paz na
região, tanto melhor.
Último ponto, desculpe, nós acordamos
também um documento importante, que será
distribuído após a entrevista, sobre o nosso apoio à
democracia, nas suas várias dimensões, tanto no que
diz respeito à liberdade, quanto no que diz respeito à
justiça social, com referência a duas situações
específicas, uma do Equador e outra do Haiti.
Secretária Rice: Thank you very much,
Minister. Thank you very much for the warm
reception that I have received here in Brazil. I look
forward to the meeting with President Lula in a few
minutes to continue our discussions about the very
important common agenda that Brazil and the United
States share, an agenda that looks to the further march
of democracy in this hemisphere and, in fact, in the
world; that looks to the expansion of opportunities
for free trade and economic development, efforts that
should hopefully, as the Monterrey consensus recently
said, help democratic states to provide to even their
most marginal citizens the opportunity for greater
444
development and greater prosperity. And in that
regard, I said to the Minister that the example of
Brazil, where President Lula and his administration
have led policies that everyone sees as economically
sound, yet policies that have been concerned about
those at the margins of life, the people who are the
poorest, the people who need educational opportunity,
the people who need health care, that that has been a
very important contribution that Brazil has made in
recent years under President Lula’s leadership.
We talked on the basis, of course, of our
common values, our democratic values, values that
are shared not just in terms of our political systems
but in terms of our multi-ethnicity as democracies.
Brazil shares with the United States, of course, varied
cultural backgrounds, including from Latin
backgrounds, indigenous backgrounds, African and
European, something that very few countries share.
And the wonderful colorful diversity of Brazil is always
on display and we share that and it’s something that
in a day when in many societies difference is a license
to kill, it is wonderful to see a democracy in which
people of so many backgrounds are, in fact, working
toward a common future.
We talked about Brazil’s role here in the
region but also Brazil’s growing global role and I
assured the Minister, as I will assure President Lula,
that the United States very much welcomes the
strengthening role of Brazil. It has been demonstrated
in many ways, including in the very excellent work
that Brazil has been doing in leading the UN mission
in Haiti, a very important effort to give to the Haitian
people an opportunity for stability and then an
opportunity to build a democracy and a better future.
We talked also about a number of challenges
in the region, states that are challenged, challenged
politically, challenged economically, and about our
common desire to help. And I might just say, Minister,
that we discussed Ecuador and discussed the fact
that there is an OAS mission that is trying to help the
people of Ecuador to find a way forward to a
constitutional and democratic process. And I might note also that there is a South American delegation
that has – the so-called troika – that is also involved
in trying to help the Ecuadorian people. And so we
promised to stay in very close contact about that most
recent situation but with an eye toward the stability
and prosperity of the entire region.
Finally, we had an opportunity to discuss other
areas of interest, like the Middle East, and I assured the
Minister that the role that the United States will play in
trying to bring about peace between Israel and the
Palestinians, but also in trying to promote reform in the
broader Middle East is one that we take both seriously
and actively. And I informed the Minister that the Quartet
will be meeting very soon to try to push forward that
very important agenda. I know it is an area that the
Minister himself has had a personal interest in and so we
had a chance to talk about that.
But again, thank you very much for the
opportunity to be here. Brazil is a great country, a
great set of cultures and a wonderful friend who I
think, with the United States and with others, can
help to build a more democratic, prosperous and
peaceful hemisphere and a more democratic,
prosperous and peaceful world. Thank you.
Porta-voz: O Chanceler Celso Amorim e a
Secretária Condoleezza Rice responderão agora a
quatro perguntas, duas de representantes da imprensa
do Brasil e duas de jornalistas dos Estados Unidos.
A indicação dos nomes partiu dos próprios
representantes da imprensa. Pediria a cada jornalista
que se limitasse a uma pergunta.
Passo a palavra ao jornalista George Gedda,
da agência Associated Press, para a primeira
pergunta.
Pergunta: Do you share the U.S. concern
about the erosion of democracy in Venezuela, the
apparent centralization of power in apparent violations
of some of the Democratic Charter of the OAS?
Chanceler Amorim: Nós tivemos ocasião
de conversar sobre a Venezuela, embora tenhamos
dito também que não queremos fazer da Venezuela
um assunto único e principal, dos nossos encontros.
Tratamos de muitos outros temas também, mas eu
não me esquivei de dar à Secretária de Estado a visão
que nós temos do processo, como nós achamos que
pudemos – sempre respeitando a soberania
venezuelana – contribuir para que houvesse uma
manifestação democrática, inclusive com observação
internacional, no caso do referendo revogatório.
Evidentemente que nós sabemos que, como qualquer
outra sociedade, existem problemas e que esses
problemas devem ser discutidos pelo povo
venezuelano. E o que nós pudermos fazer para ajudar
no encaminhamento positivo – sempre respeitando,
repito, a soberania desse país vizinho – nós faremos.
Acertamos que continuaríamos a dialogar sobre a
Venezuela, porque ambos somos amigos da
Venezuela, do povo venezuelano, e temos ambos
interesse em que a situação lá se desenvolva de
maneira sempre e cada vez mais democrática, cada
vez mais harmônica.
Porta-voz: Passo a palavra à jornalista
Denise Chrispin Marin, do jornal O Estado de S.
Paulo.
Pergunta: Desculpem, boa tarde, Secretária
de Estado. Boa tarde, Ministro Amorim. Eu gostaria
de saber como os Estados Unidos e o Brasil podem
trabalhar juntos em relação a sérias ameaças à
democracia na América do Sul, como se viu no caso
da Bolívia, no caso do Equador e, especialmente,
nas medidas internas adotadas pelo Presidente
Chávez, da Venezuela?
Em relação a isso, eu gostaria de saber,
Senhora Secretária, se incomodam aos Estados
Unidos os sucessivos respaldos políticos dados pelo
Presidente Lula ao Presidente Chávez, nos últimos
meses. Essa pergunta foi formulada em consenso
pelos jornalistas brasileiros e pelos correspondentes
aqui residentes.
Secretária Rice: We have in this hemisphere
a Democracy Charter and that Democracy Charter
is actually very clear about the obligations of
democratically elected governments to govern
democratically. And what we do through the OAS, what we do through our bilateral relations with
countries like Brazil and with others, is to try and
make sure that this hemisphere and all states within it
are living up to that Democratic Charter.
It is a remarkable development when you
think about the last 20 or so years as to how far this
hemisphere has come because the fact that you can
go to the OAS or to the Summit of the Americas and
there is only one empty chair, and that is Cuba, is a
remarkable development and it says something about
the ability and the willingness of the people of Latin
America to pursue democratic – their democratic
rights. It says something about the emergence of
enlightened governments that have lived up to that
Charter.
It does come with its challenges and in a
number of the countries that you mentioned there are
obviously political, economic and social challenges
that have made those democratic states very fragile.
And it is our responsibility as members of the
hemisphere who are associated with the Democratic
Charter to try and be helpful to those states as they
try and work their way through these difficulties. It is
why the recent events in Guatemala – I’m sorry, in
Ecuador have led us to a level of cooperation with
the OAS, with members of South American states,
to try and reach out to the Ecuadorian people and,
indeed, to the government there to see if we can help
them to get on a path toward a stable democracy. It
is why there have been concerns about Bolivia but
why there has been support for Bolivia as it goes
through this extremely difficult time.
And as the Minister said, we all want there to
be a free and completely democratic Venezuela. That
is what this hemisphere should be about. And the
issues with Venezuela are not issues between the
United States and Venezuela or Venezuela and Brazil,
they are issues about the freedom and democracy
and institutions that should – that the Venezuelan
people should have that right.
But I just want to underscore something that
the Minister said. All of this has to be understood in
446
the context of pursuing a positive agenda for this
hemisphere. That means an agenda that is devoted
to democratic governance along with – in accordance
with the Democratic Charter. It means pursuing the
economic opportunities that free trade, whether it is
at the global level through the WTO, the regional level
with the FTAA, the work that we have each done
within our own regions, whether it is South America
or North America, to try to extend free trade benefits.
It means pursuing economic policies that are pro-
growth, that have sound macroeconomic
fundamentals and it means pursuing, as the Monterrey
consensus noted, the policies that will allow people
to really start to benefit from those economic policies
and from economic growth. And that means the
promotion of good governance, of policies of non-
corruption, of health care and fighting for educational
opportunities for people. It’s the human development
side.
And I’m quite sure that if we pursue that
positive agenda in this hemisphere and pursue it
together with partners like Brazil, that we will create
an environment in which there are stronger
democracies, not so many that are fragile. There are
always going to be difficult circumstances and
challenges, but our job has to be as members of this
hemisphere to pursue policies that give democracy a
chance not just to hold elections but to then actually
provide for its people and to resist then the siren song
of kind of easy solutions that sound good but, in fact,
are not based in economic reality.
Porta-voz: Passo a palavra à jornalista
Rosalind Jordan, da rede de televisão NBC.
Pergunta: This is a two-part question for
Secretary Rice. Madam Secretary, as recently as
yesterday you reiterated your support for John Bolton
to be the next American Ambassador to the United
Nations, but there is still a continuing daily stream of
reporting – some of it salacious in nature, some of it
perhaps founded – not just about allegations about
Mr. Bolton’s management style but perhaps more
troublingly to some analysts and to some observers, about his alleged attempts to distort or exaggerate
the results of U.S. intelligence for political or
ideological goals.
Why doesn’t this stream of daily allegations,
for lack of a better word, give you or President Bush
pause about his nomination? And the follow-up would
be: Why do you believe that his nomination to be the
next U.S. Ambassador to the UN would actually help
President Bush’s foreign policy objectives?
Secretária Rice: Well, on the second point,
Rosalind, the President and, indeed, I believed at the
time when John Bolton was nominated that he was
the best person to take on the UN role for the United
States at a critical time, and we still believe that that
is the case.
I just spent a good portion of my meeting with
the Foreign Minister talking about UN reform. This
is one of the most important topics facing the world
at this point because we all want the United Nations
to be as strong as possible, as capable in the 21st
century of dealing with threats like terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction and dealing with the
concerns about poverty alleviation and social justice,
and dealing with the multiple problems that we have
in the international community.
We’ve been talking about Security Council
reform. We’ve talked about the need to reform or to
think about a peace-building commission. We’ve
talked about the need to reform the Human Rights
Commission. These are fundamental reforms of one
of the most important organizations ever created by
humankind and the United States needs a strong voice
at the UN in that debate. That’s why John Bolton
was selected for this job and we continue to believe
he’s the right person for this job.
Now, as to the stories and allegations – some
of them have been made publicly, some of them are
whispers – I think that we have a process. The
committee has examined these. We have made at the
State Department people available who have direct
knowledge of any of these issues. We have worked
overtime to try to answer the questions of the
committee, as has John. And we will continue to try
to answer questions that people might have.
But the fact is that this is somebody with
almost 20 years of public service. He has been a
capable diplomat by almost every account of his
activities. Everybody knows that he was important in
getting the Proliferation Security Initiative through, that
he was important in the repeal of the Zionism as
Racism resolution in the UN, which was really one of
the darkest moments in the UN’s history, that he was
important in carrying out the execution of the Moscow
Treaty which cut radically U.S. and Russian nuclear
forces. This is a very, very good diplomat.
We need at the United Nations a strong voice
and everybody knows that the UN needs reform.
It’s no secret that the UN needs reform. So, we would
like to get through this process. We respect the advise
and consent function of the Senate. It is time, though,
to put this to the Senate and to get a vote so that
hopefully we can put the person that the President
and I both believe is the man to do this very important
job at the UN so that we can get on with this.
Porta-voz: Passo a palavra à jornalista
Martha Corrêa, da rede Record de televisão, para a
última pergunta.
Pergunta: Boa tarde, Secretária
Condoleezza. Boa tarde, Ministro Celso
Amorim.Secretária, há pouco o Ministro disse que a
ALCA, foi um dos assuntos tratados na conversa
dos senhores. Eu gostaria de saber como esse assunto
pode avançar em questões concretas já que o
Presidente Lula anunciou que a ALCA tinha saído
da agenda brasileira.
O outro assunto, a outra questão é: Como os
Estados Unidos estão vendo a realização do Encontro
de Cúpula América do Sul e Países Árabes no mês
que vem? Essa pergunta também foi feita, em consenso
com jornalistas brasileiros e correspondentes
estrangeiros. Obrigada.
Chanceler Amorim: Bem, acho que tenho
que dizer alguma coisa antes de a Secretária
responder, porque quando o Presidente Lula – eu acho que isso já foi plenamente esclarecido – disse
que o assunto da ALCA foi retirado da agenda,
melhor dizendo, a palavra que ele utilizou foi “pauta”,
e pauta é uma palavra jornalística, ele estava se
referindo ao fato de que tinha sido retirada da pauta
dos jornalistas, porque tinha deixado de ser um
assunto polêmico e ideológico de saber quem é pró-
ALCA, ou quem é contra a ALCA. A questão hoje
não é saber quem é pró-ALCA e quem é contra a
ALCA; é saber como negociar uma ALCA que seja
boa para os dois lados.
Acho que é importante fazer esse
esclarecimento, pois não sei se a Secretária de Estado
lê todos os relatos da imprensa. Então, é importante
que ela saiba da nossa interpretação, posso dizer que
é uma interpretação autêntica, porque eu falei com o
Presidente Lula a respeito e é essa a interpretação
que ele deu. Obrigado.
Secretária Rice: The FTAA is an important
agreement. We also are working very hard on the
WTO. We’ve had very good cooperation and I want
to thank Minister Amorim, who has that portfolio and
has worked very closely with then U.S. Trade
Representative Bob Zoellick, now Deputy Secretary
of State, on the WTO. And I think we, as a result,
made some progress. So, the WTO is very important.
The FTAA is very important. And we did talk about
how we might reenergize our efforts to make progress
on the FTAA and I think we will share ideas about
how to reenergize that within the framework that was
recently agreed to.
This is not a matter of competition of elements
of free trade. There ought to be as much free trade
as possible. We have free trade agreements in the
region. We have free trade agreements in other
regions. We have, for instance, a free trade agreement
with Central America and the Dominican Republic
that we very much would like to get through our
Congress because we think it’s important to both the
economic and political stability of that region.
Free trade is important because it is one of
the most important engines for economic growth and
448
all countries need economic growth in order to be
able to provide for their people. And so this is not a
question of do we do this or do we do that. We ought
to try and do as much as possible in free trade, and the
Free Trade Agreement of the Americas was an important
initiative recognizing the potential power of a freely
trading Western Hemisphere and we intend to pursue it.
And I was pleased to hear the Foreign Minister bring
this up with me when we sat down to talk.
As to the summit with the Arab states, we
very much want to see more interaction between the
Arab world and other parts of the world. It is a region
that’s going through tremendous change at this point.
It is a region that needs reform – economic, political,
social. That has been recognized by Arab intellectuals.
It has been recognized by a number of states in the
region. There are, indeed, reform efforts going on in
that region and I think it’s well understood that a region
that has 22 countries with the GDP of Spain needs
economic reform and they are taking on that challenge.
We, ourselves, have had recent free trade agreements
with a number of states in the Middle East and we
intend to continue to pursue trade and cooperation.
I’m very glad that there will be this connection.
The Minister and I talked about the
importance of the message that is sent by that kind of
interaction and it really does say that there is an
understanding that the Arab world is in transition and
that reform is an important element of that transition.
And similarly on the Israeli-Palestinian issue, there is
an international consensus through the Quartet about
the next steps ahead on the Road Map.
Porta-voz: Obrigado.
