The Last Word: Leading the World's
Poor - Embaixador Celso Amorim,
Ministro das Relações Exteriores
(Newsweek, 06.10.03)
Angry words are still flying over who
wrecked the World Trade Organization
meeting in México last month. The debacle
in Cancún had many fathers, but much of the
fury has fallen on Brazil, which marshaled a
dissenting bloc of 22 developing nations that
demanded concessions on Western farm
subsidies before moving forward with other
issues.
Chief U.S. Negotiator Robert Zoellick
dubbed them the "won't-do nations." But
don't tell that to Brazilian Foreign Minister
Celso Amorim, 61. One of Latin America's
most experienced diplomats, he derdes that
Brazil was a spoiler or even that Cancún was
a failure. Last week he spoke to Newsweek's
Mac Margolis in BrasiUa.
Newsweek: Robert Zoellick recently
singled out Brazil for the collapse ofthe World
Trade Organization meeting. Were you
suiprised?
Celso Amorim: Yes, I confess I was.
During the meeting he had told me he thought
our agenda was "businesslike." I understand
the frustration. Everyone left [Cancún]
frustrated. But in negotiations we ali need to
keep a cool head.
Newsweek: Why did the talks break
down?Celso Amorim: Not because of
agriculture. The meeting broke down over the
late-in-the game insistence by Westem nations
on discussing the "Singapore agenda" - rules
for govemment procurement, trade fmancing
and competitiveness. Up to then we were
making progress and ready to negotiate
amendments on agricultural subsidies. We are
still eager to continue at the next meeting in
Geneva. No one wins if we ali stamp our feet
and decide to take the bali home. No one
benefits by saying, "OK, now we will only
pursue bilateral trade agreements." There is
no substitute for the WTO.
Newsweek: You retumed from Cancún a
hero, drawing a standing ovation in Congress.
What did Brazil gain?
Celso Amorim: We were able to cut our
losses. What was originally on the table, the
proposal by the United States and European
Union, would have meant greatly scaling back
expectations from previous talks in Doha. The
Brazilian delegation decided that the limited
gains that were on the table in Cancún were
not worth it. This was not obstruction. It was
a deliberate position. And if we ali take care
not to let ourselves get carried away by
emotions, we have the basis to continue
negotiating. We achieved a politicai victory.
Despite the initial resistance, we were treated
as a legitimate negotiating party, not as a
grouplet of countries over in the corner
shouting and creating obstacles. Newsweek: You speak of the dangers of
unilateralism. But isn't this exactly what has
been strengthened with the failure in Cancún,
as the United States and other nations start
cutting bilateral trade deals?
Celso Amorim: It's clear that the biggest
problems in world commerce will not be
resolved through bilateral trade agreements.
Clearly, for Brazil, the WTO is fundamental.
But it's also fundamental for the U.S. and
for Europe. Who wins in a trade war? No
one. Everyone leses in the end.
But some lose more than others. The poor,
for instance.
Evidently, the poor have more to lose. But
the WTO is also important for the U.S.,
which surely doesn't want a trade war with
developing nations. This is why we have to
quickly get back to the negotiating table in
Geneva. I think we can - if, that is, there's
the politicai will. We need to have patience.Newsweek: Does the developing world
have the luxury of waiting years for a better
trade deal?
Celso Amorim: You can't measure
patience in years. Patience means what we
achieved with the G22, building a
mechanism to listen to and respect ali
nations, even the smallest. It means spending
maybe another hour of your time to broaden
the discussion. It may take a day, or weeks,
but other countries have to be heard in order
to arrive at an agreement that is minimally
acceptable to ali.
Newsweek: What's the future ofthe 022?
Celso Amorim: The creation of G22 was
undoubtedly a bold move. In the beginning
we saw ali kinds of attempts to discredit us.
Many people thought it was going to
implode, or splinter. But we managed to hold
together. In the end, we were recognized as
a credible negotiating force. I am convinced
that we can continue in the same fashion.
Newsweek: Brazil is pressing its case for
a permanent seat on the U.N. Security
Council. Whafs your plan?
Celso Amorim: Multilateral institutions
are going through a moment of great
confusion and redefmition. The Iraq crisis
is the most obvious example, but not the only
one. How can we ensure that the Security
Council's decisions have legitimacy and the
support of the majority of nations? As long
as the Council is dominated by the victors
of the second world war, obviously you do
not have a representative body. Many
countries feel the Council doesn't represent
them. If you have new permanent Council
members, you have to have developing
nations. And if you think of developing
nations, it's hard not to consider Brazil. The
most glaring failing of the U.N. is that the
Security Council does not fairly represent the
world. This has to be corrected.