DISCURSO DO MINISTRO DE ESTADO DAS RELAÇÕES EXTERIORES
POR OCASIÃO DA 22ª SESSÃO DO CONSELHO DE DIREITOS HUMANOS
DAS NAÇÕES UNIDAS (SEGMENTO DE ALTO NÍVEL)
GENEBRA, 25 DE FEVEREIRO DE 2013
(original em inglês)
At the outset, allow me to congratulate
you, Ambassador Henczel, on your election as
President of this Council. I also wish to express
our appreciation for the work carried out by the
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mrs.
Navi Pillay, who has been a strong voice in favor of
justice, freedom and peace.
I wish to thank all Delegations for electing Brazil
for a new term of membership of this important
Council. Brazil sees its participation in this Council
in the next three years as an opportunity to:
a) on one hand, to continue to advance and
promote human rights at the national level, in their
entire spectrum – civil, political, social, economic
and cultural rights – including through an active
interaction with the multilateral system; and
b) on the other, to work in Geneva alongside
all Delegations, from developing and developed
countries, and all regions, to improve the lives
of human beings, through a balanced and nonselective approach to human rights, without futile
accusations and paralyzing polarizations.
Indeed, the protection of human rights is
enshrined in our Constitution as one of the guiding
principles of Brazil’s foreign policy. And it is
appropriate that it should be so. In our endeavors
to build a better world, a world of sustainable
development, social justice and peace, we must
strengthen our multilateral mechanisms for
cooperation. And, ethics and values must be an
inseparable part of our action.
Here as elsewhere, acknowledging that
there are challenges at home is an important and
indispensable step in order to start to overcome
them. Acknowledging a past of human rights
violations is often also necessary in avoiding
counterproductive attitudes of arrogance.
Discussing problems honestly is part of sound
democratic practice, as is the readiness to engage
with representatives of civil society.
It was in this spirit that Brazil participated, in
May 2012, in the discussion of our own situation
under the Universal Periodic Review. (Let me
say that, given the universal character of the
Universal Periodic Review, which we consider
one of the main achievements of this Council, we
are disturbed by recent episodes of unsatisfactory
cooperation.) It is in the same democratic spirit that
we maintain a permanent and standing invitation to
all special rapporteurs working under the authority
of the Human Rights Council.
Over the last few years, Brazil has taken important
initiatives that have had a transformational impact
on human rights. I will highlight a few of them. In November 2011, our Congress passed a
new law ensuring public access to information.
One of the key principles in that new piece of
legislation is that no restriction of access to
information will be allowed in matters related
to human rights violations by public agents.
In a broader sense, the new law has meant an
enormous step forward in ensuring respect for
the right of citizens to information.
Brazil also established, in May 2012, a
National Truth Commission, empowered
to examine and to clarify past human rights
violations in Brazil, with a view to safeguarding
the right to memory and historical truth.
As regards economic and social rights, we have
made unprecedented progress under such social
programs as “Bolsa Família”. President Dilma
Rousseff has made the complete elimination of
extreme poverty a national priority. Just a few
days ago, she signed a further extension of the
“Bolsa Família” program that will respond to
the needs of the remaining 2.5 million Brazilians
who still face a situation of extreme poverty. All
in all, with these new measures, some 40 million
Brazilians will have been lifted out of extreme
poverty within less than a decade. And I do not
have to stress how essential the eradication of
poverty is for the full exercise of citizenship and
enjoyment of human rights.
Combating racial discrimination has been
another priority. A number of programs have been
developed to promote equal opportunity and the
protection of vulnerable groups, such as women,
children, the elderly and persons with disabilities.
In October 2012, a new law was enacted to
ensure minimum quotas in Brazilian Universities
for students from public schools, in particular
Afro-Descendants and indigenous people. And
an important ruling by our Supreme Court has
confrmed that the quota system for access to
Universities is fully constitutional.
Important steps are also being taken to prevent
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
We are keenly aware that we still have work to
do on human rights at the domestic level. There
are still a number of signifcant challenges in many
areas, that were identifed during our recent UPR.
We will move forward by means of domestic
initiatives and also through our cooperation with
the UN and other international mechanisms for the
protection and promotion of human rights.
I stress the word “cooperation” because I am
convinced that it conveys the essential framework,
the keystone for a result-oriented approach to
human rights in the multilateral system.
We are convinced that, in a multilateral body
such as this Council – a body based on international
law and on the willingness of Member States to
work together to improve life in all countries – it
should be possible to protect and promote human
rights without selectivity, without politicization,
without North-South schisms, in a manner that
impacts the lives of individuals, and enhances
human dignity throughout the world.
In this context, I believe that the panel
“the Power of Empowered Women”, that will
take place here tomorrow, and the proposed
resolution to combat racism through education
are important initiatives in which Brazil will be
taking a leading role.
Mr. President,
The Rio+20 Conference, held last year,
provided renewed guidelines for the promotion
of multilateral cooperation to foster sustainable
development. The fnal document adopted at the
Conference – entitled “The Future We Want” –
started by acknowledging that the eradication of
poverty is the greatest global challenge facing the
world today. The human right to development
and human right to food are integral parts of this
challenge.
Human rights are inseparably linked to
sustainable development, just as they are
inseparably linked to peace. We fnd an
illustration of this notion in the efforts to
promote development in post-conﬂict situations. Ensuring the right to food, for example by
means of rural development, can prove central
to stabilization, which, in its turn, creates
a favorable environment for human rights,
freedom and peace.
This year we celebrate the 20th anniversary
of the Vienna Conference, which set up the
agreed principle that all human rights are
indivisible, and that democracy, human rights
and development are mutually reinforcing.
Such indivisibility of human rights cannot
be understood to mean that some conditions
must be fulflled before human rights can be
respected. Human rights must be respected here
and now, without pre-conditions.
Mr. President,
We are convinced that human rights cannot
be imposed from the outside, least of all
through resort to military force. In fact, armed
conﬂicts are a breeding ground for human rights
violations. Conversely, the prevention of armed
conﬂict should be also seen as an effective way
to safeguard respect for human rights.
Much has been said about the fact that
situations where governments fail to protect
their own population are unacceptable. There is
indeed an international consensus on the need
for coordinated efforts to face these situations.
However, it is also necessary to recognize that
the international community has been lacking
the political will to effectively deal with
fundamental questions concerning the adequate
protection of civilian populations.
These questions include areas such as the
promotion of sustainable development and
fnancing for development; disarmament
and non-proliferation; the illegal and poorly
monitored ﬂow of small arms; the present
stagnation of the system of global political
governance, in particular the lack of reform
of the UN Security Council; and the troubling
paralysis in the Israeli-Palestinian peace-process.
The prevention of conﬂict and the peaceful
settlement of disputes reduce the suffering
of civilians. The responsibility to protect
must be accompanied by the Responsibility
while Protecting, in particular when military
intervention is authorized and considered
potentially benefcial by the UN Security
Council. It goes without saying – but it is worth
stressing – that initiatives aimed at protecting
civilians must respect human rights and
International Humanitarian Law, including in
the context of efforts to combat terrorism.
Mr. President,
Brazil follows with great distress the spiral of
violence in Syria, where the number of casualties
– mostly civilian casualties – is staggering.
This Council has established a Commission of
Inquiry to investigate human rights violations in
Syria. The reports are appalling.
Brazil, which in the past has received a great
number of immigrants from Syria, feels deeply
concerned and saddened by the tragedy that is
unfolding in a country to which we are so closely
linked. The fact that we maintained our Embassy
open in Damascus has helped Syrians to come to
Brazil in safety. We urge all parties involved, and
most particularly the Government of Syria, to
end the violence and to make dialogue possible.
We would like to call this Council’s attention
to the fndings of the Commission of Inquiry
that highlight the negative effects of unilateral
economic sanctions, imposed by some countries,
on the Syrian people.
We support the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and we
believe that the document produced last year
by the Syria Action Group, here in Geneva, still
provides a rational basis on which to work to
prevent further militarization and to promote a
Syrian-led political transition.
Mr. President,
The lack of progress in dealing with the
situation between Israel and Palestine is simply
unacceptable. Year after year, the impasse remains and we watch the crystallization of an
unjust status quo which is deeply detrimental to
one of the sides, deepens resentments, makes a
two-state solution more elusive and in the fnal
analysis benefts no one.
Existing mechanisms, such as the “Quartet”,
have not delivered results. The Israel-Palestine
conﬂict is one of the most serious sources of
tension in current international relations, a
scenario of serious human rights challenges
and a pressing threat to international peace and
security.
Let me say that not all is discouraging
when it comes to relations between Israelis
and Palestinians. In a recent trip to the region,
I was deeply moved by initiatives taken by civil
society such as “Parents circle: Families Forum”,
which brings together families who have lost
their loved ones in the conﬂict yet reach out to
each other through an agenda for solidarity and
peace.
Mr. President,
Throughout the world, there are many other
situations in which civilians are under threat
of violence. The attention of this Council can
help to minimize such threats. The protection
of civilians must be implemented in a universal
and non-selective manner.
It is positive that the Special Rapporteur
on Human Rights and Counter-Terrorism has
decided to investigate the impact of the use of
“drones” on civilians.
For quite some time, the United Nations has
been pursuing work on the problem of summary
or arbitrary executions. It is indeed a serious
problem, one that affects the fundamental notion
that everyone is equally entitled under the law to
his or her right to life, that everyone has the right
to be presumed innocent until proven guilty. As
we know, it is called “due process of law” and
it is a core concept for the protection of human
rights. The United Nations must proceed with
its work in defense of due process and to help
eradicate summary executions.
Under this heading, this Council must also
pay attention to the unfortunate fact that religious
intolerance seems to be on the rise in some parts
of the world, including in highly developed
countries. Brazil has been expressing its concern
in particular over the increased manifestations of
islamophobia. We condemn such practices in the
strongest terms and we reiterate our conviction
that the international community must remain
vigilant when it comes to racism and xenophobia.
As we know, racial discrimination, under
whatever form, is incompatible with democracy
and human rights.
Mr. President,
Twenty years after the adoption of the Vienna
Program of Action, and ffty-fve years after
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the leadership of the United Nations remains
indispensable.
The UN has the power to offer glimpses of
hope, even in places where none would seem
to be possible. And whoever has the power of
awakening hope has also the power to change
reality.
But this power of the UN will only become
effective if we – that is, the states that are
represented here – are convinced that the task
is indeed important and urgent, if we are wise
enough to simultaneously understand differences
and build consensus on common values, and if
we have the courage to accept the diffcult and
sometimes exhausting challenge of dialogue.
Mr. President,
Brazil will participate in the intergovernmental
deliberations in this Council in close contact with
representatives of the civil society and inspired
by a strong commitment to multilateralism, on
one hand, and to a progressive humanism on the
other, always in a spirit of cooperation and open
to dialogue.
Thank you very much.