Brazil raises hopes of Doha deal next year –
Embaixador Celso Amorim, Ministro das
Relações Exteriores (Financial Times,
19.03.2004)
Guy de Jonquières
Brazil, leader of the Group of 20 developing countries
pressing for farm trade reforms, yesterday voiced
cautious optimism that a deal could be reached this
summer that would enable the Doha global trade talks
to be concluded next year. Celso Amorim, Foreign
Minister, said in an interview with the FT that he was
encouraged by signs that the US was becoming more
flexible about cutting its domestic farm support and that
the European Union could be persuaded to eliminate its
agricultural export subsidies. He said Pascal Lamy, the
EU trade commissioner, had already signaled he was
ready to agree to end such subsidies, and the challenge
now was to get Brussels to do so “without actually saying
so”.
Mr. Amorim indicated that the G-20, formed just
before last September’s failed World Trade
Organization meeting in Cancún, Mexico, was
prepared to soften its demands that Japan and other
agricultural protectionists open their markets if a deal
was reached on subsidies. “I see a way forward. You
don’t have to be a maximalist on all pillars, provided
you get the most substantive things,” he said.
However, if Japan refused to open its agricultural
market, it should compensate its trade partners with
concessions in other areas. Mr. Amorim said it was
“not impossible” for WTO members to agree a broad
negotiating framework for the Doha talks by July “and
then finish after the American elections. Not
immediately – in six months’ time or something.” He
was not worried by the protectionist rhetoric surfacing
during the US presidential election campaign, saying history showed sitting presidents were more positive
than candidates about trade. However, he expressed
concern about waning enthusiasm in Congress for new
trade deals. It was likely Congress would reject an
agreement on a Free Trade Area of the Americas
(FTAA), even if Brazil accepted all the US negotiating
demands and dropped its own.
The Brazilian Minister criticized Washington’s
approach to the troubled FTAA talks, saying it was
resisting pressure to remove its own trade barriers, which
kept its market closed to every product of interest to
Brazil. “The FTAA is not really about free trade. If you
concentrate on free trade, we are bigger free traders
than the US”, he said. Nonetheless, he believed an
agreement would still be worthwhile, although “I do not
believe we can get much [from the US]”.
In contrast to Brazil’s difficulties with the US in the
FTAA talks, Mr. Amorim said “a lot of progress” had
been made in talks on a bilateral trade agreement between
the EU and the four-nation MERCOSUR customs union,
led by Brazil. Nonetheless, both sides needed to
recognize that an eventual agreement would not contain
everything they wanted and its terms would be “to some
extent limited”.
Mr. Amorim insisted the G-20 would remain a
pivotal force in world trade talks. He believed its
membership, which at one point fell to only 14, would
increase from 19 currently to as many as 24 as WTO
negotiations became more serious. He also said Brazil
and India were close to concluding the first stage of a
bilateral trade agreement that would be a stepping
stone towards an eventual free trade area that would
also include South Africa. The European Union wants
an agreement to help take the Doha talks forward,
but is afraid of being the only one to cut its handouts
for farm exports, Reuters reports from Brussels.
Brazilian-Turkish friendship should not be
limited – Embaixador Celso Amorim, Ministro
das Relações Exteriores (Turkish Daily News,
20.03.2004)
Yuksel Soylemez interviews Brazilian Foreign
376
Affairs Minister Celso Amorim on his recent
official visit to Ankara. Amorim discusses the
state of Turkish-Brazilian relations and potential
areas of enhanced cooperation between the two
countries.
Yuksel Soylemez: Is this the first visit to Ankara
by a Brazilian foreign affairs minister?
Celso Amorim: I am very happy to be the first
Brazilian Minister of External Relations to visit Turkey.
Since 1995, when President Suleyman Demirel visited
Brazil, bilateral relations have gained momentum.
Apart from the various agreements of cooperation
signed on the occasion, President Demirel’s visit led
to the organization of the First Meeting of Bilateral
Consultations Brazil-Turkey, which took place in
March 1997. In 1998, it was the turn of Minister
Ismail Cem to go to Brazil. My presence in Ankara
today is designed to further strengthen our relations
with the Turkish government and people.
Yuksel Soylemez: You were the External Affairs
Minister from 1993-1994 and again last year. What
is in your brief for discussions with your counterpart
Abdullah Gul?
Celso Amorim: My agenda with Gul will include
issues related to peace and international security,
economic subjects, with particular attention to themes
pertaining to the Doha agenda for development, as
well as cultural and other cooperation subjects. I
attach great importance to an open and frank
conversation with Gul on the main subjects of the
international agenda and to learn about Turkey’s
perception of regional issues. Of particular interest
to my government is the increase of our bilateral trade
relations. I will also reiterate our engagement in the
worldwide fight against poverty and hunger, and
transmit to Gul information on the latest developments
in this regard. I will also inform him of the status of
preparations for UNCTAD XI, which will take place
in Brazil from June 13-18. Brazil has particular interest
in the upcoming session of UNCTAD, which we see
as the main forum of debates on globalization,
development and trade, from a perspective of the developing world.
Yuksel Soylemez: During your one-day hectic
visit to Ankara, what was your program?
Celso Amorim: I arrived in Ankara on the night
of March 18. On March 19 I paid a courtesy visit to
President Ahmet Necnet Sezer and also held a
meeting with the Turkish Parliaments Foreign
Relations Committee Chairman and Deputy Turhan
Comez, President of the Turkey-Brazil Parliamentary
Group and other members of this group and a meeting
with Gul. A dinner, on the evening of March 19, in
my honor was hosted by Gul. In my visit to Anit
Kabir, I laid a wreath in homage to Mustafa Kemal
Ataturk.
Yuksel Soylemez: This is indeed a historic visit?
Celso Amorim: Yes, I am the highest-ranking
Brazilian official to visit Turkey after the founding of
the Turkish Republic. It is in recognition of the mutual
importance of Turkey and Brazil in their respective
regions. More than anything, I was inspired by the
need to bring closer together two countries which
have a great potential for mutual cooperation in
practically every field. Brazil at present is a member
of the U.N. Security Council. Brazil is increasingly
playing a more active role on the international stage.
It is therefore a logical consequence that closer
contact should be maintained with countries like
Turkey with similar significant roles to play in an ever
smaller global world.
Yuksel Soylemez: How far will our relations go?
Celso Amorim: The first friendship and trade
agreement with Turkey dates from 1858, when both
countries were Empires. However the long ocean
voyage and relative isolation of each nation in relation
to the other did not lead, until quite recently, to a
significant development of business and official
contacts. Ever since the presidential visit of 1995,
however, the level of intensity and official contacts
has not lessened and my visit marks, for Brazil, a
new high point, following on the visit of Brazil’s
Defense Minister last November. Commercial
relations are also picking up. Several large Brazilian
and Turkish companies are poised to play an important
role and thus stimulate more trade between the two
sides.
Yuksel Soylemez: What did your talks with
Turkish authorities focus on?
Celso Amorim: Not only on general or topical
commercial aspects of the bilateral relationship, but also
they underlined mutual recognition of each country’s role
on the international stage as well as the need for increased
consultations of a political nature. Together with my
Turkish counterpart and host, the prospect was to identify
measures to initiate practical means to activate
cooperation in all fields. The friendship between Brazil
and Turkey has no need for limits: science and
technology, aerospace industry, space itself, defense
matters, trade missions, inter-parliamentary visits,
contracts between financial authorities and institutions,
such as between the Istanbul and Sao Paulo Stock
Exchanges – all these are activities or sectors with a
great potential for increasing mutual awareness and
leading to more dynamic and fruitful relations.
Yuksel Soylemez: How do you compare Turkey
and Brazil?
Celso Amorim: By happy coincidence, both
Turkey and Brazil elected new governments within
one month of each other. Both President Lula and
Prime Minister Erdogan attach great importance to
improving social conditions in their respective countries.
President Lula’s “Zero Hunger” campaign, which he
brought to the U.N., is a symbol of such a social
commitment. The more both countries can cooperate,
the more our joint efforts will contribute to world peace
and the future prosperity of their peoples.
Yuksel Soylemez: What are the common
denominators between Turkey and Brazil?
Celso Amorim: Although geographically distant,
Brazil and Turkey are at a similar level of economic
development and share the values of democracy,
tolerance and respect for the rule of law. Both our
countries face the challenge of bringing to our people
the benefits of globalization. We also share the same
vision with regard to the organization of the international decision-taking processes, which have
to be more democratic and inclusive. We share the
conviction of the importance of a strong
multilateralism, based on the United Nations for
questions related to peace and international security.
The two countries have maintained a useful relationship
in the United Nations. Turkey has supported the
Brazilian candidature for a non-permanent seat in the
U.N. Security Council, for the period 2004-2005.
Brazil is ready to coordinate with Turkey on the
various issues on the council’s agenda, as Turkey
prepares for its own participation.
Yuksel Soylemez: What is the political and
economic picture in Brazil now?
Celso Amorim: Brazil is a strong and vibrant
democracy which has now, for the first time, a
representative of its working class as President.
President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, elected with more
than 52 million votes, has established as the top
priority of his mandate the fight against hunger and
poverty. In order to do that, he launched the biggest
social programme Brazil has ever had, the “Bolsa
Familia” which will reach 11 million families, by the
end of 2006. Conscious that economic stability was
a pre-requisite for sustained growth, President Lula
has also proposed an ambitious programme of
structural reforms, which include the reform of the
pensions system, judiciary and tax reform among
others. In a little more than one year, the Brazilian
government has managed to control inflation, stabilize
the currency exchange tax, and was able to promote
a decrease in interest rates. Conditions have been
given to the recovery of our economic growth.
Yuksel Soylemez: What is the level of economic
relations between Turkey and Brazil? What are the
chances to improve them?
Celso Amorim: Bilateral trade relations between
Brazil and Turkey are still below their potential. In
2003, bilateral trade reached almost $400 million, a
significant increase (47 percent) with regard to 2002.
It is my opinion that this volume can grow rapidly,
particularly having in mind the significant size of both
378
countries’ markets (70 million for Turkey and almost
180 for Brazil) as well as their participation on regional
integration blocs. For this to happen, Brazil and
Turkey have to engage in a process of dialogue and
cooperation with the objective of promoting greater
mutual knowledge.
Yuksel Soylemez: How can the two governments
develop cultural relations between our two countries?
Celso Amorim: Cultural ties are a fundamental – if
sometimes underestimated – variable of the relationship
between the two countries. When people get to know
each other – through music, cinema, art, history, among
others – it is easier to develop relations in all areas of
politics and economics. It is my intention to suggest to
Gul that our two countries engage in a process of
vitalization of Brazilian-Turkish cultural interchange, in
the framework of our bilateral Agreement of Cultural
and Educational Cooperation of 1996.
