“The new dynamic in world trade is multipolar”
Embaixador Celso Amorim. Ministro das
Relações Exteriores (Financial Times, 4 de
agosto de 2004)
The elimination of billions of dollars in farm
subsidies and the entry of agriculture into the
498
mainstream of the multilateral trading system
constituted the centrepiece of the Doha round of trade
negotiations. Last weekend, members of the World
Trade Organisation took a decisive step forward with
their breakthrough agreement to slash trade-distorting
farm subsidies. The agreement, reached after intense
negotiations in Geneva, reflects the growing
perception that rich nations” agricultural subsidies are
deeply harmful. Their deleterious effects on
consumers, rural workers and exporters from the
developing world are now widely acknowledged -
even in developed countries. The agreement last
weekend offers the precision required at this stage,
while providing a solid basis for a true “development
round” as decided by the Doha ministerial conference
in 2001. It also highlights the emergence of a new
dynamic within the WTO.
The central lesson of the recent talks stems
from the negotiating process itself. This breakthrough
would not have been possible without a certain degree
of multipolarity now taking root in the WTO. This
new multipolarity is important because without it the
notion of a “multilateral” trade system, represented
by the WTO, would be a fiction.
Attempts were made at the unsuccessful
ministerial trade meeting in Cancun last year to
convince the WTO membership in general - and
developing countries in particular - that a pre-cooked
deal between the two leading trading partners would
be the only possible basis for agreement. But the
politics of trade were undergoing a transformation.
The Doha mandate had provided developing countries
with a platform for associating trade liberalisation with
social justice. The banner of free and fair trade was
now being waved by the poor. Reform-minded
sectors in the developed world rallied behind this
ambitious agenda. As one leading US newspaper
noted, subsidies had for some time been considered
immoral; the time had come to also make them illegal.
The appearance of the Group of 20
developing countries - representing 22 per cent of
world agricultural production and 70 per cent of rural workers - made a big difference. At first unfairly
depicted as a spoiler, the G-20 gradually established
itself as an indispensable player in the search for a
balanced solution to the agricultural conundrum. As
broadly recognised, the framework agreed last
weekend would not have seen daylight without the
active participation of the G-20. By setting out
concrete proposals in Geneva, the G-20 helped
introduce the very balance and credibility that had
been lacking in the decision-making process.
With the framework agreed, the Doha round
seems to be on track to become a real “development
agenda”. Obviously, developing nations did not get
everything they asked for in Geneva. But the overall
direction is clear: This is the beginning of the end to
export subsidies; the stage is set for a substantial
reduction in all types of trade-distorting domestic
support; market access negotiations will open up new
opportunities for trade, without prejudice to the needs
of developing countries. Recent dispute-settlement
cases will fuel the general trend toward more equitable
disciplines for world trade in agriculture.
Some observers say that even before the
guidelines established are translated into actual
measures, the convergence achieved will produce
positive spinoffs for economic development and
growth. Competitive agricultural exporters from the
south, including members of the Mercosur group, can
legitimately expect an acceleration of reforms in the
north (developing countries being the south,
industrialised being the north). More equitable trading
conditions may emerge even as negotiations proceed.
According to some initial estimates, a successful
conclusion to the Doha negotiations could lift more
than 500m people out of poverty and add Dollars
200bn annually to developing country economies.
But we should not underestimate the
challenges posed by other items, such as non-
agricultural products, trade facilitation, special trade
treatment for developing countries and
implementation-related issues. These are areas of
crucial importance for developing countries, in which
we should apply the lessons learned in the agriculture
negotiations. Perhaps we will need new “G20s” for
dealing more effectively with these issues. The
approach followed with respect to agriculture has
helped rescue the WTO from paralysis. I am
convinced this is the only way to translate into reality
the promise of the Doha development agenda and to
forge a new WTO.
