“THE POWER OF THREE”
ENTREVISTA CONCEDIDA À REVISTA MONOCLE
(DEZEMBRO DE 2012/JANEIRO DE 2013)
(original em inglês)
When Monocle published a lighthearted
idea encouraging Brazil Sweden and Turkey
to work together, its message reached their
capitals. We brought together the three foreign
ministers for this issue’s round table series.
Antonio Patriota
Brazilian foreign minister. A career diplomat
appointed by Dilma Rousseff in 2011. More
high profle than his predecessors, partly as
Rousseff doesn’t want to be her own foreign
minister.
Carl Bildt
Swedish foreign minister. One time prime
minister and leading fgure in Sweden’s
centre-right Moderate party. Spent several
years working on the Balkans as envoy for
both the EU and the UN.
Ahmet Davutoglu
Turkish foreign minister. Driving force behind
Turkey’s more proactive foreign policy and
creator of the country’s “zero problems with
the neighbours” initiative.
In the garden of a grand townhouse in
Midtown Manhattan, three foreign ministers
take a moment to relax. It is their busiest
week of the year – the few days in September
when the entire diplomatic world decamps
to Manhattan for the United Nations General
Assembly. Every minute of every day is
divided into meetings – bilaterals and lunches,
speeches and cocktail evenings. For now
though, Brazil’s Antonio Patriota, Sweden’s
Carl Bildt and Turkey’s Ahmet Davutoglu –
three of the world’s most travelled diplomats
– are happy to sit in the early-autumn sun
and reﬂect on their agreement. For the three
men have just established the world’s newest
diplomatic group.
In an increasingly fractured world, global
leadership is hard to come by. The one
remaining superpower is in dire economic
straits, its military is overstretched and the
role of peacemaker is not one it has felt
entirely comfortable with. China and Russia
are both more concerned with internal
matters and holding on to the allies they have. The European Union – Nobel Peace
Prize notwithstanding – is too busy keeping
its economic house in order to even begin to
think about what should happen outside its
own borders. Regional bodies, from Asean
to the African Union to Mercosur, can barely
inﬂuence their own members, let alone help
shape a collective continent-wide policy.
And then there’s the United Nations, never
the most dynamic of decision-making bodies,
which as the following days of speech-making
and grandstanding emphatically highlight, is
hopelessly split on all the big issues of the day.
So it increasingly makes sense for like-minded
countries to create informal coalitions based
on political views rather than geographical
proximity. Brazil and Turkey have already
worked together on nuclear talks with Iran,
while Sweden has close ties with both. There
was no plan to form a group though until a
few weeks ago. Smiling, Patriota rises from
his seat as he sees monocle. “This is all your
fault,” he says. And he’s right.
In the past two years monocle has reported on
all three foreign ministries, sending editors
and photographers to Brasília, Stockholm
and Ankara. After the most recent interview
(with Patriota in issue 57) it became clear that
the three countries all shared common traits.
They are well respected around the world and
have far more friends than enemies. They
have impressive teams of ambassadors and
are increasingly inﬂuential in the diplomatic
world.
The individual ministers are key to their
countries’ reputations. Few have racked up
as many air miles as Davutoglu, who has
become a major diplomatic player during the
Arab uprisings, while Bildt is one of the most
respected ministers in the European Union.
Patriota is a career diplomat who has played
an integral part in shaping Brazil’s new, more
expansive, foreign policy.
We published a slightly tongue-in-cheek
Monocolumn suggesting that the three
ministers establish a new “diplomatic
supergroup”. Individually, we wrote, they
“can all talk to different parts of the world that
traditional superpowers struggle to engage
with.” Collectively, they could become an
impressive global player.
The ministers all read the article and, it
appears, didn’t think it such a bad idea. Which
is why they fnd themselves in the garden of
the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United
Nations, preparing for a trilateral working
lunch. (A lunch which, if you will allow us to
point out, came with a “Monocle salad”, all in
the colours of the three countries’ ﬂags.)
What happens next is as yet unclear. Iran,
Syria and the Israel/Palestine peace process
were the main topics of discussion at the lunch
and all three are issues that the trio could
decide to take on. But while the new group
may lack a fancy name (bst is no bric) it may
be around for a while. Davutoglu has already
invited Bildt and Patriota to join him in Izmir
in January for round two.
Monocle: A very busy week for all three of
you. Why did you decide to meet together
today?
Antonio Patriota: Well we’ve been meeting
each other bilaterally and we fnd there are a
number of issues where our positions coincide.
I think we are countries that stand for similar
values, for dialogue, for multilateralism, for
negotiation, for democracy. And perhaps by  exchanging notes and looking at our own
perception of some of the international issues
that are the most pressing we can reinforce
our individual agendas and accomplish
something.
Davutoglu: Of course I fully agree with
Antonio about global issues but there is
another characteristic: we are also from three
different regions and from three continents so
we know the sensitivities and priorities of our
regions. We agree on multilateralism, on UN
reform, on other reforms of the international
architecture of diplomacy. We had an
excellent experience with Brazil regarding the
Iran nuclear programme and we have worked
with Sweden on Bosnia and the Balkans, for
example.
Bildt: There are quite a number of issues
where we have the same basic principles and
values. Then we have different geographic
positions – we span from the Arctic to the
Amazon, which is quite a wide area, and look
at the world from our different perspectives.
But we are united by quite a lot of similarities
and values and interests. But at the end of the
day it’s all your fault because you wrote in
your magazine that we should be together so
we had to do it.
Antonio Patriota:That is the best explanation.
Monocle: We’re living in quite a fragmented
world at the moment. A lot of the regional
groupings are dealing with their own issues
– be that in Europe or Latin America or
elsewhere. Do you think there is scope for
groups like this where like-minded countries
can come together where you don’t have
regional differences to argue about?
Antonio Patriota: There’s no reason why we
shouldn’t discuss with Turkey and Sweden
some problems, some of the challenges facing
the international community where we may
end up making a difference. We were having
a brief discussion about the Middle East just
now and this is one area that is a special
concern to us. We all favour peaceful solution
to disputes so let’s see where it takes us. At
this point it’s still beginning.
Bildt: And as was mentioned – the Iranian
nuclear issue where Brazil and Turkey were
at the forefront of the attempts to move that
forward a couple of years ago – we were not
part of that but we regretted that it failed. I
think it was a very good attempt and I think
we would probably be in a better place if that
had been carried forward. We are committed
to seeking a diplomatic negotiated political
solution on that, based on the obligations that
are there for each and every one.
Davutoglu: This trilateral process shows
not only the substance but the method of
diplomacy is important. The substance might
be the Middle East, it might be a nuclear
programme, it might be the Balkans, it might
be other issues. But the methods that we agree
on, using soft power, using a multilateral
approach, using empathy in international
relations and trying to understand each other
– this methodical aspect is as important as the
substance of the issue.
Monocle: Do you think you’ll work more
formally together after this? Is there something
you might come together on to work on?
Antonio Patriota: I’ll tell you something,
we’ve already planned a second meeting.
Davutoglu: In Turkey, in Izmir, in the frst
week of January, I invited my colleagues for work and holiday together for a weekend
and they kindly accepted. And we will go to
Brazil, we hope, and to Sweden.
Antonio Patriota: To the Arctic perhaps?
Bildt: From the Arctic to the Amazon.
Davutoglu: From the Arctic to the Bosphorus
to the Amazon. It could be AAB.
Monocle: All groups need a name.
Bildt: Oh my God this is going to be
complicated. We’ll set up a working group of
diplomats to contemplate that particular issue.
We promise a name coming out of the Izmir
meeting.