Coletiva de Imprensa do Ministro das Relações
Exteriores, Embaixador Celso Amorim e do
Secretário do Exterior do Reino Unido, Jack
Straw (Londres, Inglaterra, em 25 de julho de
2005)
Jack Straw: Ladies and Gentlemen, this is a
sombre occasion. I have been very pleased, of course,
to welcome the Foreign Minister of Brazil, Celso
Amorim, to a meeting which we have just held. I
profoundly regret the circumstances in which we have
had to hold this meeting which was to discuss the
death of the Brazilian citizen, Jean-Charles de
Menezes, at Stockwell Underground Station last
Friday.
Sir Ian Blair, the Commissioner of Police in
London, has already apologised to the family, to the
Brazilian people and to the Brazilian Government for
what happened, and I have repeated that and said
how deeply I regret what happened last Friday and
how very, very sorry I am that it has happened, and I
would personally, Minister, like to take this
opportunity to offer my own condolences to Mr
Menezes’ family and friends and condolences to the
Brazilian Government and people.
As I said to you in our meeting, my own sense
of loss is made the more poignant because I happen
to live in this area of London. I have lived there for
well over 25 years. I go to the local park each year
where there is a celebration of Portuguese and
Brazilian culture and I don’t need therefore to be told
about the great contribution that both the Portuguese
and the Brazilian communities are making to the life
of London.
At our meeting, Minister, I was joined by John
Yates, who is the Deputy Assistant Commissioner of
Police in London and by Roy Clark, who is the
Director of Operations of the Independent Police
Complaints Commission. Deputy Assistant
Commissioner John Yates repeated the
Commissioner’s apologies to you. You said that you
wished, on behalf of the family, to see fast progress
made in respect of the claim for compensation which is being submitted by the family. I explained to you
that this is by law a matter for the Commissioner, but
Mr Yates on behalf of the Commissioner said that the
claim would be handled sympathetically and quickly.
You raised questions about the release of the
body. This is a matter which is partly in the hands of
the Independent Police Complaints Commission but
ultimately a matter for decision by the Coroner who
is the special judge who handles enquiries into deaths
like this and Mr. Clark, on behalf of the Independent
Police Complaints Commission, said that he would
do everything that he could to expedite the release of
the body.
I should also say how grateful we have been
to you for your, and your government’s, support over
the years for the fight against terrorism in which we
are involved and which indeed the whole of the
international community is involved.
Thank you.
Celso Amorim: Thank you, maybe if I can
say some words in Portuguese because there are
some Brazilian press also here.
Queria dizer que estive aqui hoje na seqüência
do meu encontro de ontem com Lord Triesman.
Agradeço a atenção que o Secretário do Exterior,
Jack Straw, deu a esse nosso encontro. Tive hoje a
ocasião de expressar os mesmos sentimentos que já
havia expressado ontem, que são sentimentos de
consternação e de perplexidade diante da morte de
um brasileiro inocente e pacífico. Recebi, conforme
foi dito aqui, pedidos de desculpas – colocaria dessa
maneira – das autoridades britânicas. Recebi,
também, renovadas garantias de que haverá uma
investigação em profundidade sobre as circunstâncias
da morte. Evidentemente que nós conhecemos as
circunstâncias gerais, mas sobre as mais específicas
haverá uma investigação independente. O Secretário
Jack Straw lembrou seu próprio papel em criar esta
Comissão para queixas ou reclamações relativas à ação
da polícia. Isto é importante para que se saiba
exatamente as razões do erro, uma vez que o erro já foi
admitido.
Tive ocasião de levantar - embora isso seja
um assunto naturalmente da família, mas a família tem
todo o nosso apoio - duas questões específicas. Uma
tem a ver com a questão do retorno do corpo ao
Brasil. Lembrei que os familiares, inclusive os pais,
são pessoas idosas, humildes, e que é importante que
isso ocorra o mais rápido possível. Tive garantias –
embora com a ressalva de que não há uma
dependência clara do Poder Executivo, se entendo
bem – de que isso ocorrerá rapidamente; não há
razões para que isso não ocorra rapidamente. Recebi
também resposta positiva, na hipótese da família pedir
uma segunda autópsia, de que isso também possa
ser feito rapidamente.
O outro ponto que mencionei, também
lembrado pelo Secretário do Exterior, diz respeito à
compensação. Evidentemente, isso não é algo para
nós. O Governo brasileiro, expressando a opinião
pública brasileira, está chocado, naturalmente,
consternado com os eventos, mas, além disso, há
esse aspecto específico. Claro que a única coisa que
poderia nos dar satisfação é impossível, que seria
dar a vida de novo ao Jean Charles. Como isso não
é possível, também algum tipo de compensação
financeira para a família é importante, em se tratando
de pessoas humildes. Claro que isso não diminuirá a
consternação, a perplexidade, o choque diante da
morte de um inocente, mas, enfim, será uma maneira
concreta de expressar esse pedido de desculpas que
já foi feito de maneira verbal.
O Secretário já disse aqui que entende que
além do pedido de desculpas à família, há também a
opinião pública brasileira, que o Governo brasileiro
encarna, e isso também foi feito. Creio que agora a
nossa preocupação mais imediata é que a família e
os familiares que estão aqui continuem a ter todo o
apoio. Apoio para que possam acompanhar o caso
até o seu desfecho, garantir que o corpo volte ao
Brasil o mais rápido possível e examinar essa outra
questão da indenização, que, evidentemente, não
cabe ao Governo pedir, mas que tendo eu estado
hoje também com alguns dos familiares, me senti obrigado a colocar como uma questão importante,
como uma expressão, inclusive, dos sentimentos que
foram expressos aqui por mais de uma autoridade
britânica e, sobretudo, pelo Secretário.
Question: Inaudible
Jack Straw: I am just saying I haven’t got
any precise information about his immigration status
here. My understanding is that he was here lawfully.
Celso Amorim: A informação que temos, que
foi dada ao nosso Consulado, é a de que ele estava
aqui legalmente.
Question: First of all a question to the
Brazilian Foreign Minister. You are obviously under
the understanding that he was here legally. Could you
give us therefore your reaction to the news that has
just come out late this afternoon that Mr. de Menezes
was shot a total of 8 times by the Police?
Celso Amorim: Well, I am not a police expert
and I don’t know if 5 times, 8 times, or 10 times
make that kind of a difference. Of course we
understand the plight that the British people are living
after the terrorist attacks and the suicide bombings
of 7 July and by chance I had the opportunity to
express our shock because the following day I was
chairing a meeting in the Brazilian Embassy of the so-
called G-4 on the reform of the United Nations, so I
was personally the person who spoke on that. Of
course we have always stressed, and I did stress
today in our conversations, that the matter of
combating terrorism has to be done with full respect
for human rights, and of course if things happen in the
way that apparently they did happen this time, it may
play into the hands of terrorists actually because they
are disturbing the whole thing.
Question: And a question for Mr. Straw. As
a part of the wider hunt for these would-be bombers
from last Thursday we have the names now of two of
the suspects the Police are trying to trace. It would
seem -initially anyway...that they wouldn’t appear to
be from the Pakistani community. Can you confirm if
these two men are British-born and if not, or on top
of that, can you confirm what other countries you are
434
liaising with regard to trying to find out about these
men?
Jack Straw: Detail about suspects is a matter
for the Police to issue, not for me, and it would be
quite inappropriate if I was trying to add a gloss to
information which the Police have released. So far as
cooperation with other countries, we are in contact
with a wide range of other countries inside the
European Union and beyond to enhance the overall
fight against terrorism in which we are now all
involved.
Question: Mr. Amorim, are you satisfied
with the response by the British Government to the
event?
Celso Amorim: Eu vou responder em
português. A pergunta é se estou satisfeito com a
resposta ou com a reação do Governo Britânico à
situação. Creio que só posso dar esta resposta
plenamente quando todas as etapas que foram
anunciadas aqui estiverem cumpridas, isto é, quando
a investigação tenha sido completada e eventuais
culpados punidos; se foi um erro, um acidente, ou se
foi realmente algo mais; quando as questões relativas
à família tiverem sido plenamente atendidas. O que
posso dizer é que fui bem recebido, que as minhas
gestões foram bem recebidas, que, digamos , o
sentimento de choque, de perplexidade e de
consternação do povo brasileiro e do Governo
brasileiro foi bem recebido e que o fato do Governo
britânico ter pedido desculpas pelo que aconteceu
demonstra uma atitude positiva. O resto nós veremos
à medida que o tempo corra.
Question: Mr. Straw how long was
intelligence investigating Jean-Charles de Menezes?
At what point was it decided that he was a threat to
society being a suicide bomber, and who decided
that and why?
Jack Straw: Can I say that I am not in a
position to answer those questions, but those are
exactly the questions, amongst others, which will be
considered very actively by the Independent Police
Complaints Commission and Mr Clark is here as Director of Operations of that Commission. It may
be helpful if I just provide some background to the
Independent Police Complaints Commission and that
is this, that we have had some system of investigating
complaints against the Police for many years, but there
was criticism of the system which increased during
the early 1990’s. When I became the Home Secretary
I was determined greatly to strengthen the system for
investigating complaints against the Police and to make
it more independent. In parallel I set up a Judicial
Inquiry into the murder of a young black man called
Stephen Lawrence and that Inquiry reinforced
proposals which I already had for strengthening the
independent investigation of complaints against the
Police and that led to legislation, which I introduced,
establishing this Commission and I would suggest that
the system we now have is amongst the most
thorough, and the most independent of any in the
world.
Question: Doesn’t the ... kind of show that
maybe the entire policy of shoot to kill, if not wrong
of course because there has got to be a quick
response to this kind of thing, is a bit too eager and
as Minister Amorim said could be shown to the world
as ... can be used basically by the guys who are trying
to scare all of us?
Jack Straw: Well look, on the exact
circumstances in which this happened, this is a matter
for the independent investigation and you will understand
why it would not be fair to the family if I was to start
speculating about what happened. All I would say, and
I think everybody understands this, is that the introduction
of suicide bombing into this country has obviously
changed the context of policing as it would in any country
at any time. Now the Minister is absolutely right to say
that whatever the context, it has to include an observance
of human rights at the highest level and the need for
proportionality. But whilst in this country we have sadly
had long experience of dealing with terrorism, we have
not had experience of dealing with this particularly
pernicious type of terrorism, random killing in which the
bomber themselves are ready to kill themselves.
Celso Amorim: Queria dizer uma palavrinha.
Primeiro, para nós há dois aspectos, e estou mais
concentrado no caso concreto, e o caso concreto, uma
vez que não podemos reabilitar a vida de Jean Charles,
é a família e as várias circunstâncias, tanto emotivas
quanto materiais, que podem beneficiar a família, e as
satisfações que o Governo britânico procurou dar nas
conversas que tivemos. Este é o caso concreto e a razão
imediata de eu estar aqui.
Jack Straw mencionou o fato de que a
questão do terrorismo necessita um combate global.
Eu acho que sim. Sobre o primeiro aspecto, ainda,
queria acrescentar algo, porque os sentimentos que
expressei, em nome do povo brasileiro, foram também
objeto da minha conversa com o Presidente da
República, que tem sido informado durante todo o
processo. Inclusive hoje, depois de estar com a
família, conversei diretamente com ele. Quanto ao
aspecto mais global, não há a menor dúvida de que
o terrorismo tem que ser enfrentado globalmente.
Mas justamente porque ele tem que ser enfrentado
globalmente, acho que temos que trabalhar – e isso
não é uma questão que vai ser resolvida hoje, nem
amanhã – para que haja normas globais para o
combate ao terrorismo, incluindo as normas de
proteção aos direitos humanos.
Question: Do you know of any specific sum
of money he wanted in compensation?
Celso Amorim: No. It would not be up to
me to deal with this matter.
Question: Yes, I understand that. And could I
ask Mr. Straw do you have any plans to meet the family?
Jack Straw: I would be very happy to meet
representatives of the family if they wish to meet me. Of
course, it goes without question. And may I say that
also applies to Sir Ian Blair and his senior colleagues.
Question: Mr. Straw I am sure you were
informed of the sequence of events since the time
that Mr. Menezes left his home and until the time that
he was shot. As you are a member of the government,
you must be informed of that. Could you share this
with us? Jack Straw: May I say that it is precisely
because I am a member of the government I have
not been informed of that. It is an independent
investigation. This detail is held by the Police and it
will now be passed on, if it has not already been
passed on, to the Independent Police Complaints
Commission. I have not sought to obtain any
information about the detail of the operation, nor
would it be proper for me to do so until this
investigation is complete.
Celso Amorim: Queria dizer mais uma coisa.
Me desculpem, acho que com isso tenho que partir,
porque, se não, não chegarei a tempo. Tenho que
estar no Brasil amanhã. Queria dizer mais uma coisa.
Primeiro que, tendo vivido aqui no Reino Unido, tenho
confiança em que a Comissão Independente fará uma
investigação plena, “thorough” como se diz aqui na
Inglaterra, uma investigação completa e plena sobre
as circunstâncias, e que, se houver culpados, eles
serão punidos. Mas quero também dizer, e faço isso
publicamente porque o assunto não chegou a ser
mencionado, e não tenho dúvida da resposta, que,
se ao longo desse processo, caso a família ou o
Governo brasileiro tenha dúvidas sobre a Comissão,
que nos será dada a oportunidade de colocar estes
questionamentos.
