Reunião Informal do Comitê de
Negociações Comerciais (TNC) da OMC
Discurso do Ministro de Estado das Relações Exteriores,
Embaixador Celso Amorim, em reunião informal do Comitê
de Negociações Comerciais (TNC) da OMC, em Genebra,
Suíça, em 30 de junho de 2006
Thank you, Mr Chairman and Mr Director-
General.
This is indeed an important occasion because
this TNC (Trade Negotiating Committee) allows all
countries, every country, small, big, landlocked,
vulnerable, LDC (least developed countries),
developing or super-developed, all of them, to express
their opinion in a way that can be heard by everyone.
And I think it is indeed an important occasion,
because we are in a very difficult situation.
When you started consultations earlier today
you asked some of us whether we came here to
negotiate or to talk, and that reminded me of the
famous rhetoric phrase in Julius Caesar, when he said
to Marc Antonio, “We came here to bury Caesar,
not to praise him”. And, of course, it would not be
enough to invert the sense of the words and say that
we came here to praise the Round and not to bury it,
because you can bury the Round by several actions,
you can bury the Round by deliberately doing so,
you can bury the Round by not paying attention to
the interests of the small and weak and the vulnerable,
you can bury the Round by disunity where unity was
presumed and you can bury the Round just by
procrastination, so you don’t really have the sensation
that you are burying the Round, but you indeed are
burying the Round. And this is probably the main
problem that we have today.
As you know, Brazil has the privilege to
coordinate the G20. I won’t read for you the whole
G20 note, but you will see, if you look at it attentively,
not only many of the issues that were raised here,
like domestic support and market access, of course
export competition. And I claimed that the G20 had
a small part in having real progress in export
competition in Hong Kong. I really regret that we did
not have more up to now, because this would have
been one deliverable if we had been able to do away,
once and for all, with this question of parallelism, by
resolving it. But anyway, you will see that in the G20
paper many other concerns are also reflected. You
see concerns of the G33 with special products and
special safeguards, and it is very important to remind
everyone that we will have to make compromises in
order to attain our objectives, both the defensive ones
and offensive ones. You will see the concerns of LDCs
reflected there; you will see the concerns of the cotton
countries; you will see the concerns of the small and
vulnerable economies; and you see the concerns
among others of the recently acceded developing
countries. All this is part of the G20. Not for those
who sometimes think that the G20 is a group of large
developing countries interested only in their access
to markets; that is not, so it is not the case. It is a group about compromise, it is a group about
conciliation and a group really devoted to attain the
objectives of the Round.
Let us say that we see this meeting today with
mixed feelings. We see some progress in some areas,
at least verbally expressed. We haven’t seen it on
paper yet, but, verbally expressed, we see the
intention of one of the major partners to get nearer to
the G20 proposal in relation to market access and
we see the same group of countries as well as other
countries agreeing that the G20 is a sort of – to use
your expression – a sort of landing zone, for where
compromise can be reached in agriculture. We
welcome this movement. Of course, it comes mixed
with some threats, when we hear, for instance, that
G20 is G20, but G20 minus has to be corresponded
by G20 minus, which would be, of course, a lose-
lose situation for the developing countries. I hope that
doesn’t materialise as we are still hoping for G20 plus
and G20 plus. But coming back to that we welcome
that movement, I think it is important – even if it is
belated, even if it is a late recognition – that we might
have offered six months ago a good platform that
would also have encouraged others to make
movement, but it is positive movement and we want
to recognise that, the same way we recognised, about
seven months ago, the positive movement by the
United States when, for the first time, it made a
concrete proposal on domestic support. We only say
that it was not sufficient, it didn’t meet our needs, but
it was a start of movement in terms of reducing and
constraining some of the most distortive practices.
Of course, from that time on, we have stressed that it
had, among others, two major flaws: it didn’t address
the question of the overall trade distorting support
and it did not address adequately the question of
disciplines. We always heard that these were not a
take-it-or-leave-it proposal and that we could get
more provided other things went the right way. Well,
we see some things going the right way (maybe not
the full way, but going the right way), and we don’t
see movement in our direction in relation to domestic
196
support. So it is disturbing, because the gap is still
too big, and the gap is also too big on the demands
that are being put on developing countries.
I don’t want to repeat what my colleague
from South Africa already said about NAMA 11
(non-agricultural market access), but let us for a
moment think of the asymmetries that exist between
agriculture and industry, and the asymmetries that exist
between developed and developing countries. They
are huge, compared to the maximum tariff of Brazil,
for instance, which is often quoted as an example of
a protectionist developing country. Compare our
maximum tariff in industry to the maximum tariff of
several of the G10 countries for instance, or the
United States or the European Union. So that is also
a starting point if you are looking for a harmonisation
which was implicit in the Swiss Formula reasoning.
But where is the harmonisation between agriculture
and industry? And where is the harmonisation between
developed and developing? I see the concerns and I
can understand the concerns of developed countries
when I say “Well, I have big political problem in selling
this at home”, and you are speaking of what ? You
are speaking of one, two per cent of the population
very often. They could all be put for matter in the
Caesar Park Hotel, or something like that, and be
kept by some sort of green box compendium and
not much would happen. But of course I hear too,
and I heard from one Minister of a European
Community country (whom I won’t mention) who
came to Brazil and said “Well, you have to understand
we all have our second homes and we have to have a
beautiful landscape in order to go from our first home
to a second home”. Very nicely said in a country where
more than 70 per cent of the population doesn’t have
the first home.
So I think all this his to be put into perspective
and all this is about development round. So when we
really think of finding a balance and finding a landing
zone or a landing ground you have to take all these
things into account. And I think the distances are still
very big. I hear, for instance, the European Union saying “We are in NAMA with 50 rather than 20”.
What does he mean by that? Who said 20? Nobody
said 20. So what is it? Maybe you said 20, Mr
Chairman, but we did not say 20. So what is he
referring to? We are only increasing the gap, and I
am really afraid that if we have this situation after this
weekend we will be in a very very serious situation, a
very, very serious condition. Very dramatic actions
will have to be taken. I don’t know whether it will be
by you, if it will be by the leaders of the most important
(or at least the richest) countries, but if we don’t have
a real movement in that direction – in the direction of
development – it is not only here that we will fail, we
will fail in our combating against poverty.
I agree, by the way, with my American
colleague and friend when she says that trade is more
important than aid. Actually we’ve been saying that
for 50 years, when UNCTAD was formed it was
precisely on the basis of trade instead, or at least on
top of aid, or rather than aid. But the fact is that it has
to be trade that really represents gains for developing
countries. It cannot be trade that represents poverty,
exploitation and misery in developing countries. Let
me just quote another thing. When we mention the
comparison between NAMA and agriculture, as I
have already said, in agriculture it is one, two percent,
maybe in some countries three per cent of the
population, in our case in industry we have 35 percent,
and in some countries more. So if one percentage
point which may mean some prejudice maybe to 0.1
per cent of the population in Europe or in the United
States or in Japan, for us it means tens of millions of
people. So that has to be borne in mind, and so I am
worried. I saw a positive movement on the part of
the European Union when they talked about the G20
proposal in market access. I saw, maybe because I
am too optimistic, but I even think I heard something
positive by Japan when they say they were flexible. I
don’t know exactly on what they were flexible, but I
surmised that it was in NAMA. However, I am worried
when I see nothing coming nearer – actually getting further
away – in terms of domestic support, and demands on
industrial goods increasing and increasing and that is
because we have not come to services yet.
So I am to finish. I am sorry, Mr Chairman,
but, now, in order to finish, very dramatic decisions
will be needed. I don’t know if we will be able to
take some of them now, if we will be able to prepare
the ground now, but let us not delude ourselves that
we can just let things go and that a miracle will happen.
Thank you.
