“a sHininG examPle”
entreVista ConCedida à PuBliCação “tHe CaPital”
(etióPia, 09/05/2012)

Brazil’s 26 states and 200 million people
make it the fourth largest country in the
world. recently the country overtook the uk
to become the world’s sixth largest economy
with a GdP of usd 2.5 trillion and a per
capita GdP of usd 12,917.
Capital’s elias Gebreselassie talked to
ambassador antonio Patriota , Brazil’s
foreign minister. in 2011 he took over from
the previous fm Celso amorim following the
swearing in of Brazil’s frst female president
dilma Vana rousseff who took over from the
popular luiz inacio lula da silva.
Capital: Please tell us about your mission
here in Addis Ababa?
antonio Patriota: i came to addis ababa, frst
of all to have bilateral contact with the Ethiopian
government. I was very honored to be received
by Foreign Minister Hailemariam Desalegn and
then by Prime Minister Meles zenawi, followed
by a meeting with the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union (PSCAU). At the
AU meeting I held talks with Commissioner
Ramtane Lamamra who deals with peace and
security in the African Union Secretariat.
Capital: Brazil is one of the BRICS members’
countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South
Africa). What role does Brazil play in this
group?
antonio Patriota: We are very engaged
integrating South America, which is a region
that’s experiencing high economic growth,
reducing inequality, and bringing democracy
to all countries. In addition to that Brazil has
been developing what we call global outreach
where we look at established powers like
the United States, and emerging powers as
partners. BRICS is a special coordination
mechanism; fnancial and economic issues,
science and technology and political issues
are very important to us. However, let me add
that we place a high importance on Africa;
we are one of the countries with the largest
number of embassies in Africa worldwide.
Africa is experiencing several success stories
in terms of economic growth and Ethiopia
is a very good example of stability, both in
social progress and economic potential. This
is a country of great possibilities; so as we
engage globally with the BRICS we wish to
pay special attention to Africa also, not only
South Africa which is a BRICS member but all the leaders in the continent and certainly
Ethiopia is in a leadership position right now.
Capital: How far along is the idea of a BRICS
bank for developing countries?
antonio Patriota: We began considering this
at the last BRICS summit in New Delhi, India
where my president Dilma Roussef attended.
We supported the idea of a BRICS bank,
because it would provide resources for the
developing world. Also, again I think Africa
should be a focus, we’re still in the initial
stages of the studies for the establishment
of the bank. But at the political level there
have been expressions of support and we will
continue to be engaged in the efforts to see
this materialize in the nearest possible future.
Capital: The former Colombian Finance
Minister Jose Antonio Ocampo unsuccessfully
ran for the World Bank presidency. As is
often the case, the position was taken by an
American, based on longstanding agreements
between Europe and America. What is your
view on this issue?
antonio Patriota: We feel that the time for
oligarchic approaches to the distribution of
positions internationally is over. And we
believe that the heads of the IMF and WB
should be chosen on the basis of merit and the
curriculum and not nationality. If you look at
the economic situation for 2012 more than 50
percent of the world’s growth will be insured
by the BRICS countries and the emerging
nations of the world. So there’s no reason
why Europe and the United States should
monopolize positions in the IMF and WB
which is why we subsequently supported the
Nigerian candidate Ngozi Onkonjo- Iweala to
make a systemic point. But we also believe
the new World Bank President is a very
capable leader and we intend to work very
constructively with him. I personally have met
with him and I admire his works as a public
health specialist in places like Haiti, Peru; so
we wish him all the success in his tenure as
World Bank President.
Capital: What is Brazil doing to increase its
role in these fnancial institutions like the imF
and the WB, while also furthering the interests
of developing countries in these institutions?
antonio Patriota: When we look at
furthering development with partners in
Africa and elsewhere, we don’t necessarily go
through the World Bank or the International
Monetary Fund. Of course they have their
own role to play especially in the World Bank
because it is a major source of support. But
many Brazilian companies are increasingly
involved in activities worldwide, here in
Africa it’s no different, in the spirit of not
only looking at profts but of contributing to
the social progress of the nations where they
have a presence. So in the mining area, the
infrastructure development area, there are
companies working in several countries like
Angola, Mozambique and the West African
region. We also hope to be a part of Ethiopia’s
efforts to increase energy output. Brazil and
Ethiopia are countries that place a high value
on Hydro Electric Power, also there’s the
Lamu project that will involve kenya, South
Sudan and Ethiopia which are expected to also
involve Brazilian companies. I also spoke to
the Chief executive Offcer of the ethiopian
Airlines Tewolde Gebremariam, there are
plans to ﬂy directly to Brazil. This will greatly
increase the possibilities for government,
business, academics or other citizens to engage
in cooperation with this part of the world. In
addition to that the Brazilian government
has a cooperation agency, we work on many fronts, agriculture is one and here in Ethiopia
the conditions are similar to those in Brazil, so
there’s a lot that we can accomplish through
maybe helping Ethiopia develop bio-fuels
through sugar cane plantations. These are all
avenues that we would like to explore, as well
as education as mentioned by Prime Minister
Meles. I will go back to Brazil and try to see
how we can enhance educational cooperation.
Capital: Brazil has a long history of ties
with the African continent both socially
and economically. What steps is it taking to
enhance and develop them?
antonio Patriota: We have forty embassies
in Africa and a presence in the African Union
and Arab League. We feel enthusiastic about
the South America-Africa summit which is a
forum that meets at regular intervals. So you
can be reassured that in our future diplomatic
efforts, Africa will feature prominently. Brazil
could not be imagined or conceived without
recognizing the strong African contribution
to our national identity, and we wish to place
a high value on our relations with countries
in Africa, and in particular with some of the
leaders in Africa. Addis Ababa being the
diplomatic capital of Africa is a place where
more and more Brazilians will be visiting.
Capital: For a two year period -2010-11-
Brazil was a non-permanent member of the
United Nations Security Council (UNSC).
What steps is it proposing to make the UNSC
more accountable to the whole international
community?
antonio Patriota: We’re very active at the
United Nations in trying to correct what we
call the democratic defcit. in no place is
this more obvious than the Security Council,
because the composition reﬂects the world of
the post world war II and not the contemporary
world. So we hope to be able to work with
African nations very closely in order to render
the Security Council representative with
permanent members from the developing
world, Latin America, Africa, south Asia as
well as other new permanent members Japan
and Germany who are partners and allies in
this agenda. But this is not suffcient, we also
need to make the council more transparent,
accountable, less prone to adapt coercive
action and more ready to exhaust possibilities
offered by diplomacy, negotiations, and
dialogue.
Capital: Brazil currently is the sixth largest
economy in the world. What lessons can it
give to other developing countries
antonio Patriota: Our reliance on our
domestic market made it possible for us,
not only to overcome diffculties of the
international economic crisis; but also to lift
40 million Brazilians out of poverty allowing
them to enter the middle class, where they
started to consume. That’s one of the main
reasons apart from our resources in energy
and our ability to trade with the whole world
that made us reach this level.