Entrevista concedida pelo Ministro de Estado
das Relações Exteriores, Embaixador Celso
Amorim, ao Jornal The Guardian, em 09 de
dezembro de 2005
Brazil viewpoint
Tom Phillips in Rio de Janeiro
The WTO talks in Hong Kong don’t start until
next week, but Celso Amorim already has earache.
As Brazil’s Foreign Minister, he is on the front line of
trade negotiations between the G-20 group of
developing nations – of which Brazil is a leading
member – and the US and the EU.
It is a frantic tug-of-war. The G-20 is calling
for the removal of agricultural tariffs and subsidies. In
exchange the EU wants Brazil and others to reduce
their tariffs on industrial goods. Amorim is emphatic
that Brazil has placed all its cards on the table. “The
next move must be the move of the Europeans,” he
says. “The offer made so far is really poor. What we
need now to move things further is a better offer in
terms of market access on the part of the EU.”
Many people have been predicting the failure
of the talks. “If it carries on like this, it doesn’t make
sense any more”, Amorim told reporters in Geneva
last month. “There is no negotiation. We will need
Hong Kong II”. But Amorim now says he is positive
that some progress can still be made, “although I
understand realistically that what we can get in Hong
Kong is probably more limited”.
EU demands on industrial tariffs have been
inflated to make any deal impossible, he believes. “I
have the impression that [agreement] is not even a
goal - I’m convinced that setting the bar so high was
a way not to make an additional move on agriculture.
For instance the EU was asking for a 75% [cut in
industrial tariffs] in the case of Brazil and 77% in the
case of India. That is of course absurd.”
Some experts see the deadlock over
agricultural subsidies as a gamble by the G-20, with
trade negotiations in effect having stalled for the past
two years. If no progress is made before next year,
some observers believe it could take 20 years to
achieve significant changes in trade relations between
developing and developed countries.
Amorim, however, is adamant that the G-20
will not retreat from its demands. “I don’t know what
we can afford”, he says. “If you are in a political
process and someone asks you: ‘Either vote for the
dictator or you will not be able to vote’, I don’t know
what I would prefer. Probably not to vote”.
“We can’t afford it. But I hope developed
countries would also understand that they cannot afford
to keep the inequalities [and] to widen the gap between
developing countries and developed countries”.
Despite the differences, Amorim is optimistic
that the Europeans will bring something new to the
table next week. He is less accepting of comments
by the EU trade commissioner, Peter Mandelson, that
Brazil’s commercial interests are incompatible with
those of other G-20 nations.
“What do we [the G-20 nations] have in
common? The need to dismantle the absurd subsidies
which distort world trade and which create hunger in
the third world. We are talking about 60%-70% of
mankind, something like 50% of agricultural
production. Real reform is what will help countries
like Burkina Faso, like Chad [and] Benin”.
Amorim also addresses the need to have fairness
and to combat poverty and the causes of terrorism in
the wake of the attacks on the US on September 11,
2001. “That’s why the Doha round [of trade talks] came
into being in the first place, because there was this kind
of vision at the time because of the event that had just
happened”, he says. “I hope nothing similar will have to
happen again for us to make the important decisions
that must be made”.
