Conferência Ministerial
da União Africana
Discurso do Ministro das Relações Exteriores, Embaixador
Celso Amorim, durante Conferência Ministerial da União
Africana, em Arusha, Tanzânia, em 23 de novembro de 2005
Honorable Minister Juma Ngasongwa; Dear
Ministers; Honourable Delegates,
It was with great pleasure that I received the
invitation to come to Arusha to address the African
Union Ministerial Conference on WTO Negotiations.
I would like to thank our hosts, the Government and
the people of Tanzania, for their friendship and warm
welcome to one of the most beautiful places of this
wonderful continent.
I feel at home in Africa. I have come several
times to this land, sometimes accompanying President
Lula, sometimes on my own. One of President Lula’s
first priorities is the intensification of Brazil’s relations
with African countries. This year, for example, I had
the pleasure of visiting Dar es Salaam. Shortly
afterwards we opened our Embassy there. We are
proud of having the largest population of African-
descendants outside Africa. We want to strengthen
our partnership in the context of enhanced South-
South cooperation.
We have a common past, notably the struggle
against colonization. Today we face the common
challenge of fighting poverty and underdevelopment.
A large proportion of Brazil’s population lives below
the poverty line. We understand Africa’s predicament;
we share its objectives. We are partners in the
common struggle to raise the standards of living of
our peoples. When President Lula, together with
other leaders, launched the initiative to combat hunger
and poverty worldwide, he was not thinking primarily
of the poor people in Brazil, but, first and foremost,
of the millions and millions of human beings living in
countries still less fortunate than our own, the majority
of them in African countries.
The launching of multilateral trade negotiations
in Doha four years ago was meant to create an
opportunity to conclude the unfinished business of
the Uruguay Round. The central idea behind the DDA
was, and must continue to be, to redress the
development deficit in world trade. New and
enhanced rules are required to allow developing
countries to reap the benefits of integration into the
world economy.
Dear friends,
True development requires freeing poor
countries from the shackles of historic dependency.
In the WTO, this means, inter alia, changing provisions
that favour a few in the development world to the
detriment of the many in the developing world.
Although the developed agenda encompasses a series
of important issues, it is my considered view that the
greatest potential for positive change is in agriculture.
This is where we, developing countries, are most
competitive and more readily able to participate in
the world market. Yet, it is in agriculture where the
most glaring distortions lie. Cotton is a case in point.
Cotton production is the sole means of livelihood for millions in developing countries, including
in some of the most impoverished areas of the world.
Our producers not only have to face structural
challenges and lack of material resources. They have
also to be able to compete with heavily subsidized
exports from developed countries. If prices fall in the
world market – and historically low prices have
prevailed for the past several years – our producers
take the hit. Their competitors from the developed
world, however, do not. Their treasuries guarantee
prices frequently twice as high as those of the world
market.
The end of distortions in world cotton trade
is not something to be negotiated in the context of
future rules. It is a legal and ethical right the WTO
Dispute Settlement Body has determined we are
entitled to under the current rules; rules for which
developing countries paid a steep price during the
Uruguay Round. The period for implementation of
the results of the cotton case is over. Brazil is reserving
its rights to adopt countermeasures. But we sincerely
hope that early and full implementation of the WTO
ruling will make trade restrictive measures
unnecessary and alleviate the unfair treatment
dispensed to producers from the developing world.
Brazil has been working together with African
countries on this matter, trying to ensure that results
of the cotton case are fully respected and not
undermined by the ongoing negotiations under the
Doha Round. We are committed to the cotton
initiative launched by four African countries, which
must take world cotton trade one step closer to a fair
deal.
The cotton example shows that increasing
market access for our products, through tariff cuts or
quotas may be important, but surely not enough. Such
measures can be rendered innocuous by other
distortive practices. Subsidies of such magnitude as
those given to cotton producers in rich countries have
the concrete effect of excluding developing countries
from the world market. It is blatantly unfair that our
farmers be compelled to compete with rich Treasuries.
166
This is why agriculture lies at the heart of the Doha
Development Agenda and why it is so important for
developing countries.
Less than a month before the Hong Kong
Ministerial Meeting, negotiations on agriculture are
facing a brick wall. The major economies – those
responsible for the greatest distortions in agricultural
trade – must show the political will necessary to
bridge the wide differences that still exist in the
negotiations. Developing countries have shown
preparedness to shoulder responsibility by providing
a contribution in keeping with their capacity.
In reality, we face a twin gap: the gap between
developed and developing countries; and the gap
between industrial and agricultural goods. One gap
compounds the other. The G-20, to which Brazil
proudly belongs, is playing a crucial role on both
fronts.
The G-20 has dramatically enhanced the
participation of developing countries in the negotiating
process. The transparency and the inclusiveness with
which the Group operates have given its members a
sense of ownership in the negotiations. It has tabled
comprehensive and balanced proposals that are both
ambitious and realistic, bearing in mind the specificity
and diversity of needs of developing countries. The
G-20 has consistently tried to reach out to other
groupings of developing countries, such as the African
Group, the ACP and the LDC’s.
The message of the G-20 is a message of unity
among developing countries. I am convinced that only
by preserving our unity and strengthening our natural
coalition, will we be in a position to ensure that
development objectives of the DDA are attained. We
are at a key moment in the negotiations and we have
to avoid, at all costs, falling into the trap of the old
“divide and rule” strategy.
In order to promote our interests, we must
work on several fronts. We must foster our common
goals, be it the waiver on TRIMs or on adequate
treatment for TRIPS and Health. Regarding the latter,
developing countries and the African Group in particular should not accept any outcome that would limit the Doha
Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health, by placing
private gains ahead of the common welfare.
Although real to some extent, differentiation
among developing countries does not address their
deeper needs. It is certain that different degrees of
economic advancement exist among developing
countries. Brazil does not face the same challenges
as a poor country in Africa or a vulnerable economy
in the Caribbean, even though more often than not
such differences are exaggerated to weaken our
common struggle.
We must also be able to act together with
creativity and solidarity, so as to increase the trade
opportunities of the most needed among us.
I want, at this point, to address the issue of
preference erosion that has often been used to create
divisions between groups of developing countries.
Unilateral preferences may, arguably, bring
some temporary comfort. But preferences cannot
guarantee predictable and effective market access in
the medium and long run. They are unstable by nature,
leaving developing countries hostage to the whims of
the providers and to their changing political interests.
Due to their inherent instability, these schemes do not
foster dynamic growth. Furthermore, other limitations
such as sanitary regulations considerably constrain
the theoretical benefits of preferences. It is not
surprising that they generate a mere US$ 1 billion for
LDC’s, a tiny fraction of total world exports, which
totalled US$ 9 trillion in 2004.
We are not insensitive to the plight of the
countries that depend on preferences. Preference
erosion is a real problem. This is why adequate
transition periods should be allowed and other creative
measures must be put into effect to reduce the
overdependence on this fragile instrument. This is why
Brazil proposed – and its three Mercosur partners
agreed – to announce their disposition to offer duty
free quota free access for products coming from
LDC’s, especially from Africa and Latin America.
Other measures can be envisaged for Hong
Kong that will help LDC’s and other vulnerable
economies to embark on a path of sustainable
development. One example of such measures that
can yield concrete results is more flexibility on rules
of origin, especially on the part of developed nations
to LDC ́s and other countries that may be affected
by preference erosion. This will significantly enhance
the possibilities of those countries to diversify their
production and/or to add more value to their
traditional products.
On this very day, a plant jointly operated by
a Brazilian trading company and a Jamaican state
enterprise is starting its shipments of dehydrated
ethanol. This investment based on state-of-the-art
technology can be replicated to other countries and
products if more adequate and LDC friendly norms
are in place.
New and existing investment mechanisms on
the part of the World Bank can play a key role in
making technical and financial assistance for
developing countries a reality. But poorer countries
should not be left for themselves in seeking such
assistance. It is a moral obligation to see to it that
establishing programs with this objective is part of
the commitments undertaken by WTO members.
After all they are the same countries that constitute
the World Bank, the IMF, etc.
In this context, I would like to end with a
cautious note of optimism in relation to the Doha
Round. I was positively impressed by a recent
statement by Prime Minister Tony Blair, who is now
holding the Presidency of the European Union. He
recalled that agriculture accounts for under 2% of
the GDP and roughly the same share of employment
in developed countries.
The British Prime Minister goes on to say that
“the EU and the US must go further, within
negotiations on agriculture. We must reduce trade
distorting subsidies. We must see a credible end date
for export subsidies. We must put an ambitious limit
on the number of sensitive products that can be
afforded extra protection.” Developing countries cannot and should not compromise their right to
development.
Developing countries should not accept any
attempt to lower the level of ambition of the Round.
In the final analysis, what is at stake is the possibility
of achieving the development goals of the DDA.
Reducing the level of ambition would still be
tantamount to limiting the prospects for developing
168
countries, at the same time as they would still be
required to make concessions that would reduce their
policy-space.
This is certainly not the result that all of us
have been looking forward for many years, especially
since Doha.
Many thanks.
