“GLOBALIZING THE SECURITY COUNCIL”
(PROJECT SYNDICATE, EUA, 3 DE JUNHO DE 2013)
BRASILIA – The 1945 United Nations
Charter represented a historic breakthrough
in the pursuit of peace on a multilateral basis.
At the end of a global war that claimed more
than 50 million lives, the United States and
the Soviet Union emerged as the world’s
two major powers. The UN Charter, initially
negotiated by the US, the Soviet Union, and
the United Kingdom during World War II,
established a Security Council containing fve
permanent members, including France and the
Republic of China.
At its inception, the UN brought together 51
countries; it now has 193 member states. But,
although the Security Council was enlarged
in 1965 by increasing the number of nonpermanent seats from six to ten, its permanent
members have not changed since 1945.
The world has gone through extraordinary
transformations since then. In addition to
interstate conﬂict and the proliferation of
weapons – particularly weapons of mass
destruction – new challenges have emerged,
such as terrorism and the involvement of nonstate actors in internal conﬂicts. Meanwhile,
the global distribution of economic and
political power has undergone a radical
reconfguration, setting the stage for the
emergence of a multipolar international order.
In this environment, the Security Council’s
frozen composition is imposing signifcant
limits on the international community’s
capacity to address global challenges.
Conﬂicts drag on without proper action from
the body created to resolve them. Thousands
of civilians die, are displaced, or are subjected
to appalling human-rights abuses, while the
Security Council proves unable or unwilling
to act. Reform of the Council is thus urgent
and indispensable.
A majority of UN member states are in
favor of creating a new Council with an
expanded roster of both permanent and nonpermanent members. This majority reﬂects
a growing perception that the world would
be more stable and more secure with a
strengthened and updated multilateral system.
That means adding new voices to reﬂect the
world in which we now live. Only then will
the Security Council have the legitimacy to
act on today’s manifold conﬂicts.
A reformed Security Council would reﬂect
the emergence of new powers and their
readiness to contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security. In the
fnancial and economic arena, this new multipolarity has already led to quota reforms
at the International Monetary Fund and
resulted in the consolidation of the G-20 as
the premier venue for multilateral economicpolicy coordination.
The contrast with matters of peace and
security is stark. Entire regions of the world,
such as Africa and Latin America, are excluded
from the nucleus of decision-making. A
governing body that is not representative fuels
uncertainty and frustration among those subject
to its decisions, undermining the legitimacy –
and thus the effectiveness – of its actions.
The greatest risk that we run is erosion of
the Security Council’s credibility, and, with
it, a diminishing capacity to confront grave
threats to peace. We all stand to lose if new
international crises end up being addressed by
coalitions of countries at the margins of the
Security Council and in a manner that ﬂouts
international law.
The lessons of the recent past are clear. In any
conﬂict, neighboring countries’ participation
and commitment are indispensable to the
achievement of peace. Only an expanded
Security Council can enable effective conﬂict
resolution worldwide.
The international community cannot
afford to postpone reform. It is our duty to
preserve the multilateral system of peace and
security – an achievement of the international
community that, despite its shortcomings, has
helped save the planet from another war on a
global scale.
Only an increase in the number of
permanent and non-permanent seats can
remedy the representation defcit within the
Security Council and adapt it to the realities of
the twenty-frst century. If new members and
regions are not offered a seat at the table, the
Council will face increasing irrelevance – and
the world, more than ever in need of effective
conﬂict resolution, will be far worse off.