The Real Cancun - Embaixador Celso
Amorim, Ministro das Relações Exteriores
{Wall Street Journal, 25.09.03)
The Cancun Ministerial Conference did
not produce consensus. Discussions amongmember states of the World Trade
Organization remain inconclusive and will
have to be taken up by delegations at the
WTO"s headquarters in Geneva. Although
the absence of agreement on modalities for
moving forward is a disappointment, in one
fundamental aspect Cancun can be seen as
positive: attempts by major trading powers
to dilute the Doha mandate on agriculture
did not prosper, and the voice of the
developing world was taken into
consideration.
The question here is not whether a modest
outcome would have been better than the
absence of results. The real dilemma that
many of us had to face was whether it was
sensible to accept an agreement that would
essentially consolidate the policies ofthe two
subsidizing superpowers - with very modest
gains and even some steps backward (the
new, broader definition of "blue box"
subsidies to accommodate the U.S. for
instance) - and then have to wait for another
15 or 18 years to launch a new round, after
having spent precious bargaining chips.
As coordinator of the Group of 22
developing countries that presented a united
front on agriculture, I am convinced thatCancun will be remembered as the
conference that signalled the emergence of
a less autocratic multilateral trading system.
In Brazil, and in a host of developing
countries large and small - which represent
69% of the world's farmers - Cancun has
been hailed as a tuming point.
Let me be clear. We are not interested in
North-South confrontation. To use an
expression made popular by trade negotiators
when combating protectionism under its
many guises, our platform is about "leveling
the playing field," through the full integration
of agriculture into the multilateral rulesbased trading system. It is about addressing
in a decisive manner the most important
unfmished business of the Uruguay Round
(should I say, business that was never
seriously taken up?). It is about honoring the
terms of the Doha Development Agenda in
an area unanimously viewed as its
centerpiece.
Two years ago at Doha, member states
agreed to substantially improve market
access, phase out export subsidies and
substantially reduce distorting domestic
support in agriculture. The so-called
"mandated negotiations" required by Article
20 of the Uruguay Round Agreement on
Agriculture had come to a standstill. Certain
trading powers insisted that, in the absence
of a new round - with a broad agenda
including industrial goods, services and rules
on new topics such as investment,
competition, trade and environment - it
would not be possible to liberalize their
agricultural regimes.
After the Seattle debacle in 1999, this
reasoning gained increasing acceptance, and
in 2001 politicai conditions fmally allowed
for the launching of a round at the WTO
Ministerial in the capital of Qatar. It is
important to underline, however, that the
trade liberalizing exercise launched at Doha
represented a long overdue collective
commitment to do away with protectionist
barriers and trade distorting policies in an
area of vital importance to competitive
exporters from both the developed and the
developing world.
As I had the occasion of stressing in
Cancun, no other area of trade is subject to
such blatant discrimination as agriculture.
Distortions in agricultural trade not only harm eíFicient exporteis by denying them
market opportunities. Domestic and export
subsidies in developed countries depress
prices and incomesthroughoutthe world, cut
into export earnings and increase food
insecurity in developing countries. Their
addictive nature does not contribute to
productivity gains or the creation of wealth.
They only generate dependence, on one side,
and deprivation on the other.
Contrary to what some have said, ours is
not a maximalist agenda. In fact, our
"offensive" objectives are very similar to
those the U.S. used to advance until quite
recently. Indeed, these are the sort of
proposals the U.S. promoted when I was
head of the Brazilian delegation in Geneva
and was nominated (by the U.S.!) to chair
the Agriculture Committee of the WTO. In
Cancun, even after we made a genuine effort
to accommodate the interests of our broadbased constituency of developing nations, I
would venture to calculate that between 70%
and 80% of our proposals corresponded
almost literally to what the U.S. upheld until
not very long ago. Cancun did not fail on
account of agriculture. We were ready to
negotiate in earnest. We had prepared
amendments for the last text brought to the
negotiating table. Our approach was
recognized even by those on the other side
as "businesslike."
As we resxime negotiations in Geneva -
hopefully with a lighter agenda as regards
the "Singapore issues" - may we bear in
mind the lessons of Cancun. The G-22 and
other developing countries will not be
reduced to the role of supporting actors in
discussions that affect their development
prospects. Consensus cannot be imposed
through pre-cooked deals that disregard
previous commitments and ignore the
legitimate aspirations of the majority of the
world's population. Trade must be a tool not
only to create wealth but also to distribute it
in a more equitable way.
We are confident that a virtuous alliance
among those who support free trade and
economic development throughout the globe
vwll prevail in steering the Doha Round to a
successful outcome, in line with the promises
raised at its inception. Brazil vdll be working
actively vwth ali WTO trading partners to
make this possible.