Brasil-Dinamarca

Brinde do Ministro de Estado das Relações Exteriores,
Embaixador Luiz Felipe Lampreia, por ocasião do almoço
oferecido a sua Alteza Real, o Príncipe Herdeiro Frederik
da Dinamarca, Brasília, 30 de outubro de 1996

On behalf of the Brazilian government, it is an
honor for me to welcome Your Highness and the
members of your delegation to Brasilia.
Your visit coincides with an important
milestone in our relations, as we celebrate the 50th
anniversary of the establishment of the DanishBrazilian Chamber of Commerce. This is an
opportunity for us to take stock of what we have
accomplished so far and to set a course for the years
to come.
We share with Denmark the values of
democracy, justice, and peace.
Your country is viewed as a model of social
progress and political stability. Denmark is one of the
few countries to contribute one percent of its GNP
to foreign aid and development assistance. Its actions
regarding the environment, its role in promoting
European integration, its pursuit of greater security
through an easing of tensions, and its efforts aimed at
more effective international cooperation inspire and
set an example for the peoples of the world.
Your Highness,
Brazil is in the midst of a process of economic
adjustment and stabilization with sustained growth.
Your visit comes at a time of renewed hope and
enthusiasm, a time of important social progress and
concrete economic results such as the reduction and
control of inflation, currency stabilization, an increase
in the purchasing power of the population, expansion
of productive investment, in the context of an
unprecedented opening of our market.
Like Denmark in Europe, Brazil is also
engaged in a successful process of integration.
MERCOSUL, a customs union comprising a market
of some 200 million people, has helped to expand
intra-regional and foreign trade and to rekindle the
interest of foreign investors in its member countries.
Brazil’s sizable economy and growing market,
its participation in MERCOSUL, the strength of its
political institutions, as well as its global interests have
created conditions for us to strengthen traditional
partnerships and forge new ones, particularly with
long-standing friends such as Denmark.
And we have a sound foundation to build
upon. Our relationship extends from the political and
economic to the scientific and cultural fields. You
country houses one of the oldest and most important
collections of works by Albert Ekhout on colonial
Brazil. The collection, donated to King Frederik III
by Maurice of Nassau in 1654, was exhibited at the
Museum of Modern Art of São Paulo in 1991, under
the sponsorship of the Danish government.
Between 1830 and 1840, the famous Danish
paleontologist, Peter Wilhelm Lund, ventured through
our country and made important findings in the region
of Lagoa Santa, in the State of Minas Gerais. Nearly
150 years later, I am pleased to note that you are reviving the Danish tradition of exploring Brazil, as,
in addition to Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and Brasilia,
you are also visiting the Amazon region.
I trust your trip to Brazil will provide you with
a better understanding of our realities and will help to
promote further interest between Danes and
Brazilians. Just as bilateral trade and investment levels
have increased significantly in recent years, we must
also help to bring our peoples closer together. And
your presence here today is of great significance.
We welcome each and every opportunity to
renew our friendship with the Danish people. We
gladly received the visit of Minister Mimi Jakobsen
earlier this year. We are honored to have Your
Highness here with us, and we hope to be further
honored with a visit from Her Majesty Queen
Margrethe II in the near future.
I myself hope to make an official trip to
Denmark in the first semester of next year, thus
signaling the importance Brazil attaches to our bilateral
relations.
And it is in this spirit of further strengthening
the bonds of friendship between us that I ask all to
raise your glasses to the prosperity and happiness of
the Danish people, to the close ties which bind
Denmark and Brazil, to the health of Her Majesty
Queen Margrethe II and His Royal Highness Prince
Henrik, and to the personal happiness and well-being
of His Highness Prince Frederick.
Thank you