Entrevista concedida pelo Presidente Luiz Inácio
Lula da Silva à revista Forbes, em 08 de julho
de 2005
Brazil’s President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva
was interviewed via e-mail by Richard C. Morais.
Forbes: Based on the tenor of the
conversations at the World Economic Forum in Davos
earlier this year, and the Doha round of negotiations
unfolding, Brazil is in a unique leadership position to
influence agriculture trade reform on behalf of
developing nations. In Brazil’s agricultural circles,
however, your government is being criticized for having
become preoccupied with social issues and for having
lost the momentum on the trade reform debate.
Specifically, your government is criticized for not
aggressively following up on the cotton and sugar
subsidy WTO cases that Brazil won last year. Please
explain to us what precisely your government’s
priorities are in regards to agricultural trade reform?
President Lula: The cotton and sugar
disputes Brazil won at the WTO are the most visible
and publicized cases, but Brazil has been involved in
a number of other cases that affect the interests of its
agricultural sector, cases related to bananas, poultry,
frozen chicken, orange juice, soluble coffee, and
apples (as a third party).
Some [cases] are also following up on the
cotton and sugar [WTO decisions], since the United
States and the European Union are under the
obligation to implement the rulings and
recommendations of the Dispute Settlement Body.
There is still a lot to do with regard to the monitoring
and enforcement of those recommendations.
Also, the dispute on frozen salted chicken
cuts is now entering the appeal phase. Brazil is also
actively pursuing its agricultural negotiating objectives
in the Doha Round, together with the G-20. By the
end of this round, we hope to see a real reform of
agricultural policies, with the end of export subsidies,
substantial reductions in domestic support and
significant improvements in market access.
Forbes: Property rights enforceable through
a relatively efficient judicial system are the bedrocks
of modern societies. Societies that do not enforce
this concept-even those with great economic potential-
are forever damned to the under performing economic
half of the globe. Traveling through Brazil, it was clear
to me that your country suffers terribly and
unnecessarily because of murky property rights-a curse
that bedevils the poor and rich alike-a nebulous
environment that encourages the country’s worst criminal
elements. Why have successive governments in Brazil
failed to tackle this issue? What is your government doing
to address this deep-rooted problem?
President Lula: Property rights and rural
land ownership issues have never been completely
resolved in Brazil-and this is a historic liability that
our government needs to deal with. Agrarian reform
was never completed in our country. Even today, in
the 21 st century, in hard-to-reach farms in the interior,
there is still exploitation of slave labor, which cannot
be tolerated. This has resulted from a process of
unequal and unfair modernization. It is more than a
mere coincidence that today Brazil is one of the 15
largest economies in the world, yet has the second
worst income distribution on the planet. We have
taken strong actions to change this situation. We have
been peacefully and productively promoting an
efficient agrarian reform program. Within our Ministry
of Labor and Employment, we established a program to combat slave labor that has received praise from
around the world. To combat the problem of what
you called a “nebulous” legal environment with “murky
property rights”, in March 2004 we launched the
National Program to Register Land and Document Rural
Land Ownership, which will establish a satellite monitoring
system to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
the procedures for identifying and regulating all of Brazil’s
national territory. We have also worked forcefully to
establish environmental policies that are economically
and ecologically sustainable.
Through such approaches, since I took office,
we have already demarcated eight million hectares
as forest Conservation Units, meeting our target far
ahead of the schedule we had agreed on with
international organizations for 2007. Establishing a clear
legal framework for Brazil’s national territory will tend
to reduce rural land conflicts significantly, while stimulating
productivity and reducing social exclusion in rural areas,
without putting at risk the natural resources that belong
to future generations of Brazilians.
We are fully aware of how important this is
for Brazil’s economic development: agribusiness has
been one of the primary sectors responsible for
Brazil’s record-setting exports last year, which
surpassed the $100 billion mark. That success
resulted from combining well-integrated public policies
aimed at both agricultural entrepreneurs and family
farmers. In our view, there is no incompatibility
between the policies aimed at these two sectors, but
rather a perfect marriage between economic
development and social justice, which is the primary
goal of my government.
