Conferência de imprensa concedida pelo
Presidente da República, Luiz Inácio Lula da
Silva, e pelo Primeiro-Ministro do Reino Unido,
Tony Blair, por ocasião de visita ao Reino Unido
(Londres, 9.3.2006)
Prime Minister: Good Afternoon everyone,
and thank you for coming to this press conference.
Can I extend a very warm welcome here to the
498
President of Brazil and say how delighted we are with
the State Visit that he is undertaking to our country,
and I would like to describe to you the nature of the
talks that we have had this morning.
Obviously we have discussed a number of
important regional and international issues, and will
continue with our Ministers to discuss areas of bilateral
cooperation. We are signing a series of
Memorandums of Understanding today in areas like
education, and science and technology, and action
on climate change where Brazil has been developing
in respect of ethanol fuels and very, very interesting
ideas. We have also been discussing the general state
of our bilateral relationship, which is strong and good
and we want to see even stronger still, and of course
the relationship is one in which there is a substantial
amount of commerce and trade.
However, we have actually focused a large
part of our talks today on the issue of world trade
and the World Trade Round, and it is our common
belief and understanding that this is a huge moment
of decision for the world. The potential benefits of a
dynamic and ambitious round are there not just for
the developing countries, and those countries that are
most developed, but of course also for the poorest
countries in the world. And this is a moment in which
it is essential that we show the leadership necessary
to break through the obstacles and have that ambitious
round. The World Trade Round may seem a very
dry subject to people, but the result of an ambitious
round would be felt in greater prosperity, more jobs
and greater social justice. It is a very, very important
year therefore for the world. The reason it is such an
acute problem is because if we do not succeed this
year then the US Presidential mandate runs out in
2007 and it is therefore going to be far more difficult
at that point to get agreement.
So what we have agreed is to work together
closely, Britain obviously within the European Union,
and Brazil within the G20, and to try to persuade our
partners and colleagues to go beyond the established
positions and have a far more ambitious round. To that end we are prepared to have a meeting of the
key leaders and we will discuss with our colleagues
how and when that can be possible. But I think this is
in the end something where the detail of course has
got to be debated and discussed by the trade
negotiators, but it is also an issue for us, the leaders,
to make sure that we fulfil the expectations and needs
of our people to have a good and bold trade round.
So I want to praise President Lula specifically
for his leadership and his passion on this issue, which
is important, and to say I think it is evidence also of
the growing role of Brazil on the international stage,
which is why once again I expressed to him also our
strong support for Brazil’s permanent membership
of the UN Security Council.
President Lula da Silva: Good afternoon,
everyone. Brazilian journalists, British journalists. I
came with a prepared declaration for the press,
because for me the visit that we have been carrying
out to the United Kingdom this week is a visit which
should really be able to change the level of relations
between Brazil and the United Kingdom in the fields
of politics, social affairs and in our cultural and
economic relations. And we are now concluding this
visit and my evaluation is very positive with the net
results. I will be going home convinced that relations
between the United Kingdom and Brazil have at this
time reached a higher level. The density and the variety
of the meetings that I have had in London have
allowed me to substantially intensify dialogue and
cooperation between our countries. The three days
in the United Kingdom have strengthened in me the
image of a country that has been able to conciliate
over time tradition with innovation.
In the meeting we just had, Prime Minister
Tony Blair and I were able to verify our agreement
on central issues on the international agenda.
Considering the frank conversations we have had, I
am convinced that the United Kingdom and Brazil
together will make a crucial contribution to unblock
the Doha Round at the WTO. To that end we will
work to convince other world leaders about the need
for an agreement that will help developing countries,
and especially the poorest countries. The Prime
Minister and I agreed that as soon as possible it would
be good to hold a meeting of Heads of State and
Government to give a decisive push to these
negotiations. The United Kingdom and Brazil share
the understanding that we need concrete urgent
measures to be taken to make our global order more
balanced and more equitable.
We also agree with the need for a broad
reform in the United Nations, and we all know that
the Prime Minister Tony Blair has been a partner in
giving support to Brazil as a Permanent Member of a
reformed Security Council. The clearest expression
of this is in all the public declarations in all the times
that I have met with the Prime Minister. That is why
Brazil is thankful for the position of the United
Kingdom.
We are also still committed to promoting an
agreement of association between Mercosur and the
European Union. I have emphasised to Prime Minister
Tony Blair that South America is a zone of peace,
with a strong democratic vocation which has very
promising prospects in the economic area for its
development. Today in our region we are convinced
that a cycle of sustained development is fundamental
for the final consolidation of democracy in our
continent, and for us to be able to adjust and pay our
centuries long social debts in each country to our own
peoples. All of the authorities in our continent are
committed to that cause to achieve social justice.
Prime Minister Tony Blair and I have
reaffirmed our commitment to meeting the Millennium
Development Goals. We have reiterated our support
to initiatives to fight hunger and poverty around the
world. We are involved in identifying and
implementing innovative financial facilities to that end.
Brazil is supporting the IFF pilot project, launched
by the United Kingdom, to finance vaccinations
against disease. We participated in a pilot project
launched last week in Paris which will establish
contributions and solidarity from airline tickets to fight aids, malaria and tuberculosis. The joint declaration
we just signed established commitments in areas that
we consider to be strategic for bilateral cooperation
in areas such as science and technology, the
environment, health, education, creative industries,
racial equality, just to mention a few.
It is clear that there is a major potential for
cooperation in sustainable development, particularly
in the energy sector. Brazil today is an international
benchmark in research and the use of biofuels, for
example ethanol and biodeisel, and I had the chance
to talk with Prime Minister Tony Blair on other
occasions as well, most recently in South Africa, and
with all the authorities of the United Kingdom whom
I have met, I have no problem and always invite them
to be partners with Brazil, and to improve the
technology for producing biofuels, because it is our
understanding that in the 21 st Century we cannot leave
it to the end of the century because we won’t be here
any more. We have to start now, we have to turn
biofuels into the big matrix for energy and for fuels in
general, it is less polluting, it creates more jobs and it
is, not just for the interest of emerging countries like
Brazil and developed countries like the United
Kingdom, but above all the poorest countries, such
as the countries of Africa and central America.
I am also certain that this visit will be good to
push even more the trade and investments between
the United Kingdom and Brazil. The business seminar
that I attended yesterday, and the contacts I have
had with British business leaders, showed me the great
interest they have in Brazil today. All this is due to the
seriousness that we have shown in our macro-
economic policies, bringing stability and responsibility
above all for the steps being taken in an electoral
year when we cannot allow the election to end up
being a problem for things that are really working.
Whether you are looking at Brazil from the inside or
the outside, you need to see that Brazil has finally
decided to help itself and the only thing Brazil needs
is Brazil itself to help with its own development, to
build its own basis for development.
500
And I want to conclude by saying to Prime
Minister Tony Blair that I will be eternally grateful for
the affection that my wife and I, and my delegation,
have received during these three days that we have
been here. I don’t know if there is any place in the
world where I would be better treated than I was
here. If there is, I would really like to be able to go
there soon, because I am going home with the best
of impressions, and with the impression that the
interest of investors from the United Kingdom and
Brazil are very high. I see the interest in partnerships
between the business sectors of the two countries,
and I am also going home convinced that the United
Kingdom has started to look to Latin America, to
South America, and within South America there is no
way that people cannot see Brazil, which is the biggest
territory in our continent.
And for that reason, my dear Prime Minister,
I thank you. I hope that some day in Brazil I will be
able to return this affection, and I hope that we can
receive you in Brazil for us to be able to continue
discussing issues of the common interest to Brazil,
the United Kingdom and the world – namely more
democracy, more development, more income
distribution, less terrorism, less drugs and more
development. That is what we want and that is what
we are fighting for. And it is with that conviction that
I leave the United Kingdom shortly, but I am happier
than when I came.
Prime Minister Tony Blair: Thank you very
much indeed. That was an excellent vision that you
set out. Thank you.
Question: Can I ask you whether you
discussed the shooting of Mr de Menezes, and
whether you have full confidence on the Brazilian side
that the British police have told the truth and
cooperated fully with the investigations, and whether
you Prime Minister still have full confidence in the
Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police?
Prime Minister Tony Blair: On the very
latter point, yes, of course I do. But yes, of course
the President and myself discussed the de Menezes case, and once again let me say that we offer our
deepest regrets to the family for this very tragic event
and I of course assured the President that the proper
investigations and procedures would continue through
to their conclusion.
President Lula da Silva: We are working
on the basis of trusting that the government and the
police in the United Kingdom will investigate what
needs to be investigated and they will do what must
be done. Our Ministry of Justice has sent a
commission here, we have interest in working together
on this because we want there to be justice for the
family, they deserve all the support of the British and
the Brazilian governments for us to be able to discover
what actually happened. I will be meeting with the
family soon, I will be talking with Jean’s cousins, and
I intend to say to them not just what has already been
done by our Ministry of External Relations and our
Ministry of Justice, what we know that has been done
by the British government, but also to make ourselves
more and more open and to make our Embassies
available for us to be able to do whatever can be
done and is within our reach for us to be able to make
up for the pain that this family has suffered. But we
also understand that the British people have been very
understanding, have felt this very dearly. After all, this
is the kind of incident that no-one would like to have
happened, neither here in the United Kingdom, nor
in Brazil, nor anywhere in the world.
Question: The Brazilian government, does it
really want to build 7 new nuclear plants in 15 years?
How much investment does that mean? And is that
decision of concern to the British? And what is the
Brazilian government’s position on Iran’s decision to
go on with its nuclear projects? I am asking you, but
I would also like to hear the Prime Minister’s
comments.
President Lula da Silva: Well first of all I
would not like to talk about things, policies in Brazil,
because I will be arriving in Brazil tomorrow, early in
the morning I will be in Recife, and all the press will
be there to ask me a lot about our domestic problems,
and then I will be going to another event. But the
thing is that the government has not made a decision,
the government is discussing technically all possibilities
for us to be able to have the total control over energy
production to ensure our country will have sufficient
today and in the future. There is much to be done by
the government in the energy field, obviously we will
not stop discussing nuclear energy, which is always
an important issue, and at some point we may come
to a precise position. But all I can say is that the
government has not decided because when it does
decide it will go over my table and you will know,
because it will be in our interests to communicate to
the Brazilian nation what we plan to do. For the time
being we are still deciding. We have decided to build
Belo Monte Hydro Plant and we are preparing the
whole process to build two hydro-electrics on the
Madeira River as well, and we are investing very much
in biofuels and we are also thinking about using
biomass as part of our energy mix. That is what we
are talking about. When this issue comes on to my
table for a final decision you will know what we have
decided then and it is clear.
And as you know, with regards to Iran, I have
had the chance to speak with many people around
the world. Brazil has a clear position. First of all, Brazil
defends the idea of countries being able to use nuclear
energy as they need it; second, we defend Iran, like
Brazil, being committed to the decisions of multilateral
organisations, that is how we imagine that people
should treat something as serious as this. That goes
for Iran, that goes for the United Kingdom and for
Brazil. We all have to be subordinated to the fora
that democratically make policy decisions on nuclear
policy issues.
Prime Minister Tony Blair: I agree.
Question (Larry Elliott, Guardian): Two
quick questions on trade. The first one, you talk of
concrete and bold steps, but isn’t it the case that the
really concrete and bold step that needs to be taken
is by the European Union in improving market access
for agriculture, and until and unless that step is taken, these talks are going to struggle? The second point
is, when and where do you envisage this meeting of
leaders taking place?
Prime Minister Tony Blair: I think on the
latter point we have obviously got to discuss with the
other key people how this can be taken forward, but
it has obviously got to be at the right moment to give
the necessary push for the talks to succeed. And yes,
of course there is an issue about Europe and its
agriculture policy, but there is also an issue about the
agriculture policy of other countries, and then there is
the non-agricultural goods and services as well, so it
is everything together. And what we are really saying
is that if we can get a concerted move all ways round,
by every part of the international community, to be
much more bold and ambitious on this, then yes it
will mean changes in the policy of Europe, but also of
other countries as well, but that is what we want to
see. And the reason for that is that in the end it is in
the interests of everybody that we move to a more
open trading situation, and in particular it is in the
interests of some of the poorest countries of the world
because this is supposed to be a development round
that they are able to sell their goods into our markets.
And one of the things that has come out very strongly
from this visit of the President of Brazil is the
commitment he has as well to Africa, and I know he
has travelled extensively there recently, and there is
an absolute obligation and duty on us as an
international community to find a way forward so that
the poorest countries of the world gain access to the
markets of the more wealthy countries. However, it
is also in the interests of the wealthy countries
themselves to have a more open trading system, that
is the way that we make progress. And I think that
the only other point I would make is that I think the
success or failure of this round is also a very strong
indicator of the commitment that countries have to a
multilateral process. This is a process that has got to
be negotiated in the international community by
different countries and different regions with different
interests, but with one common obligation duty and
502
indeed interest, and that is to make the thing work, to
take down the trade barriers and allow us to trade
freely in the interests of our citizens. So yes, it will
mean changes everywhere if we are going to get this
done, but we believe it is important.
Question: I would like to ask the President,
the military troops have been in the hills of Rio de
Janeiro for the past several days looking for weapons
that have been stolen from army bases, and you as
the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, were
you consulted about that action, and if you were did
you understand the constraints of this kind of search,
and if these arms are not found?
President Lula da Silva: First of all, I shall
be talking about that tomorrow when I land in Brazil.
I was informed by my Vice President, Acting
President, Minister of Defence and informed by the
Commander of the Army, and we will only know
whether we will find them or not if we look for them.
If we cross our arms we will not find anything, for
sure. And it was extremely serious what happened,
we don’t know who – someone, we don’t know who
– occupied a military base and stole the weapons.
We cannot allow that to happen. Therefore I think
that the army is taking all the care that it needs to, it is
working together with the Military Police for us to
find not just the weapons, but also to be able to find
out who carried out that attack into an army base
where they stole the weapons. But certainly tonight
when I arrive in Recife I will be more closely involved
in that, whether there was violence or not, this is always
the confirmation that violence leads to violence, and
we would not like that to happen, but no matter what,
the army has to search for what belongs to the army.
