“Join Brazil in planting oil – Only radical
solutions will overcome the energy and
environmental crises while promoting equality”
Artigo do Presidente da República, Luiz Inácio
Lula da Silva, publicado no jornal “The
Guardian” - Londres, Reino Unido, 7.3.2006
The 21 st Century will be marked by a crucial
debate: how can we make economic and social
development compatible with the preservation of our
natural environment?
The challenge is faced by developed and
developing countries alike, but the burdens need to
be more equally shared. The width of the divide
between rich and poor countries has doubled over
the last 40 years. While the developed world has
benefited from the prosperity generated by economic
progress, poor countries suffer the consequences of
environmental degradation resulting from uncontrolled
444
growth. Rich countries have unsustainable patterns
of production and consumption. They are responsible
for 41% of total carbon dioxide emissions, and their
overall consumption of raw materials is four times greater
than that of all other countries combined. With those
conditions, there is no possibility of a sustainable future.
The scale of Brazil’s natural assets is
extraordinary: the Amazon region contains 20% of
the planet’s fresh water, and almost two-thirds of the
country is still covered by natural vegetation. Against
this backdrop we have been implementing policies
that directly address our most pressing environmental
concerns.
When I began my term of office, the rate of
deforestation in Brazil had been increasing by an
average of 27% per year. From the second half of
2004 onwards, however, we put measures in place
to monitor tree-felling and to address the issue of land
distribution, with the result that the rate of deforestation
has fallen dramatically. In a country that suffers from
profound social inequalities, however, the success of
environmental policy ultimately depends more than
anything on economic and social measures that are
themselves geared towards the preservation of our
environment.
Over the next 10 years we will place an
additional 13m hectares of the Amazon region under
a management regime that will guarantee the forest’s
regeneration cycle. And our commitment to a
responsible approach extends well beyond our own
territory. It is imperative that we put into practice the
commitments of the Kyoto protocol to combat the
potentially devastating impact of global warming.
In the search for new, sustainable economic
models, the international community is coming to
recognise the need for a radical rethink in relation to
the generation of energy, and Brazil is responding by
using clean, renewable, alternative energy sources to
an ever-greater extent. More than 40% of Brazil’s
energy comes from “green” sources, in comparison
with around 7% in rich countries.
The ethanol Brazil produces from sugar cane is attracting worldwide interest, for it is one of the
cheapest and most dependable types of fuel derived
from renewable sources. Three-quarters of the cars
now being produced in Brazil have “flex-fuel” engines,
capable of running on either ethanol or petrol, or any
mixture of the two.
The government has implemented
environmental initiatives that are also bringing social
benefits - for example in the form of the biodiesel project.
Produced from oil-bearing plants, biodiesel is significantly
less polluting than conventional petroleum-based diesel.
As it can easily be produced by small farmers in some
of the poorest regions of the country, the project
combines environmental protection with rural
development, and reduces social inequality. There is a
great potential for biodiesel in Africa.
Brazil is actively preparing itself for a new
development paradigm that will meet the
environmental and social challenges of the coming
decades. Ethanol and biodiesel are the key
components of our approach, and we are determined
to “plant the oil of the future”. I invite you to join us in
our endeavours.
