“rio+20: ProteCtinG tHe enVironment is not enouGH”
(tHe Guardian - 20/06/2012)
A three-dimensional approach to
development is now needed – one that
combines social, economic and environmental
concerns
Rio+20 is a landmark for the future. As
more than 190 countries gather in Rio, we
are witnessing a historic moment. The recent
global crisis has shown that old-fashioned
views about development are misleading. It is
now time to rethink the very foundations of
how we consider development, wellbeing and
wealth.
Over the past four decades, the world has
increasingly realised that our natural resources
are under serious pressure. A growing
awareness of the need to ensure sustainability
has led a whole new generation to consider
the requirements of sustainable development
in its decisions to produce or consume. This is
no small achievement. Rio 92 was a major step
forward. Important legal texts on key issues
were adopted. These conventions ensured
important progress that we must maintain and
build on.
We now face a complex challenge.
Protecting the environment is not enough.
We need to encourage public and private
decision-makers to incorporate environmental
and social concerns into economic planning
and growth strategies. This will require a
new thinking from policymakers, experts,
business people, project managers and many
other public and private actors in order to
plan and implement sustainable development
initiatives.
From now on, a three-dimensional
approach to development is crucial, one that
combines social, economic and environmental
concerns. Rio+20 is endeavouring to become
the launch pad for this new development
model. This is why one of the main topics
of Rio+20 is building consensus around the
need for “sustainable development goals”.
They will offer a blueprint for international
co-operation on sustainable development
for years to come. Future strategies, be it for
governments, entrepreneurs or civil society,
must offer a balanced and integrated approach
encompassing the three pillars of sustainable
development.
In order to achieve this result, Brazil
decided to adopt new methods. Innovative
tools for multilateral meetings were
introduced, bringing national governments
and global civil society together. The
Dialogues for Sustainable Development, a Brazilian initiative enthusiastically embraced
by the UN, opened straightforward means of
communication between interested groups
and civil society on key aspects of decisionmaking. Through an online platform, more
than 1 million votes were cast, expressing
views on 10 issues related to the conference.
Topics ranged from energy and water to
sustainable cities and food security. During
four days in Rio, sharing the venue of the
summit, experts, businessmen, activists
and journalists engaged in live debates and
streamlined the proposals that will be handed
to the heads of state and government. The
“Rio dialogues” were so successful that the
UN is now considering turning this initiative
into a standard practice for future summits.
Another key objective of Rio+20 is the
strengthening of the UN framework for
sustainable development, with a view to
greater effciency and consistency across
issues.
Rio+20 has launched an important debate
on green economy in the context of sustainable
development and poverty eradication, based
on the understanding that there is no onesize-fts-all solution. a green economy only
makes sense for developing countries if it is
accompanied by a signifcant improvement
in the living standards of the population, with
special attention to the most vulnerable.
Rio+20 involves an assessment of the past
20 years and a look into the next few decades.
We are confdent that this message will echo
through the years, fostering new initiatives
which can lead to a more sustainable future
for all.
ANTONIO DE AGUIAR PATRIOTA,
BRAzIL’S MINISTER OF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS.