London School of Economics
Palestra do Ministro das Relações Exteriores, Embaixador
Celso Amorim, proferida na London School of Economics, em
Londres, em 17 de março de 2004
I wish to thank you for your presence and express
my satisfaction at being able to present to you Brazil’s
perspective on current international challenges. As
President Lula indicated, when he spoke to you on
July 2003, the London School of Economics is held
in very high esteem in our country for its tradition for
independent thinking. Many in Brazil have drawn
inspiration from the work of LSE professors and
scholars.
As a young diplomat in London, I was a post-
graduate student at LSE, and benefited greatly from the
intellectual vitality and social responsibility which are the
hallmarks of this institution. The name of Ralph Miliband
stands out in my mind amidst other distinguished
intellectuals, as a political scientist and as a human being.
To me and to many of his students and admirers,
Miliband represented this unique blend of idealism and
pragmatic thinking that was at the very origin of LSE. I
feel greatly honoured to be here today.
Last July you had a first hand account, from
President Lula himself, of Brazil’s determination to
implement a programme of change capable of placing
our economy on the path to sustainable growth with
effective income distribution, job creation and social
inclusion. You are aware of the special attention we
attribute to the fight against hunger and extreme
poverty at the national level. I need not elaborate on
Brazil’s commitment to democratic rule and
responsible governance.
My task, as Minister of Foreign Affairs, is to reflect
these values and priorities in our relations with the
rest of the world – in accordance with President Lula’s
vision of a more democratic, co-operative and
humane international environment.
It might be said that in many respects my position
is enviable: respect for President Lula’s personal
leadership has opened many doors to Representatives
of the Brazilian Government worldwide – in the North
and in the South.
As I have often observed to journalists in Brazil
and elsewhere, the demand for President Lula’s
message is greater than the “supply” of Lula. In every
country I have been to – and I have travelled widely
during the past fourteen months – I have found much
sympathy and support for the policies and the spirit
of the Lula Government. No doubt, Brazil – under
President Lula – is touching many hearts and reaching
out to many minds.
At the same time, I am under no illusion that we
will continue to face an uphill battle in our diplomatic
agenda on crucial areas, such as: making international
trade less skewed against developing countries – from
agricultural subsidies to intellectual property
constraints; mobilizing resources for the attainment
of the “Millennium Development Goals” – and
reducing hunger and poverty in particular;
strengthening real and effective multilateralism and
promoting more representative and democratic
decision-making at the global level – from the UN
Security Council to the G-8; establishing social justice and respect for international law as the foundations
for enhanced security and lasting peace.
In Latin America and other parts of the developing
world we have been suffering – for some time now –
the social consequences of policies unsuited to our
circumstances. As pointed out in the recently
published ILO panel report on The Social Dimensions
of Globalization, the new emerging consensus is that
globalization has not lived up to its promise. It has
failed to improve the livelihood of most people in the
developing world. In many quarters it has made social
problems more acute. As Joseph Stiglitz said, if we
wish to stem the growing tide of discontent towards
globalization we must promote more inclusive debates
and focus more on the social agenda. This implies
reviewing some of the neoliberal assumptions and
prescriptions about minimizing the role of the state
and a blind faith in the ability of market mechanisms
to produce the changes needed to make the world
socially more fair and politically more stable.
Thanks to a comparatively benign domestic
political evolution, Brazil has been spared the serious
social turbulence that has afflicted many of our
neighbours from Ecuador to Argentina, from
Venezuela to Bolivia. But this has only made us more
sensitive to the interconnectedness between our own
destiny and that of our fellow South Americans.
As I have stated before, if we fail to integrate
through increased trade and investment, and if we
don’t join our forces on the basis of our shared
democratic values and cultural affinity, we may have
to resign ourselves to the perverse integration of illegal
armed groups, organized crime and drug-trafficking.
Clearly, we must assume our individual and regional
responsibility in the search for new and more balanced
policies. We must preserve the political achievements
since the end of the military rule, in the 70’s and 80’s.
But we must also improve the lot of our people.
In Brazil, we have been working hard to defeat
disillusionment and promote renewed faith in our
ability to work together, within South America and
beyond, towards common prosperity and stability.
80
The cornerstone of this effort of integration has
been the bilateral relationship with Argentina. The
broad convergence of views between Presidents Lula
and Kirchner on the most pressing issues confronting
us has been expressed in the “Buenos Aires
Consensus”, adopted in October 2003.
This document reflects our common aspiration for
economic growth with social justice and manifests
our determination to transform the MERCOSUR
trading block (which also comprises Paraguay and
Uruguay as full members, and Bolivia, Chile and Peru
as associated members) into a catalyst for building a
shared future. The meeting that has just ended in Rio
between the two Presidents confirmed once again
this commonality of perception, while fully recognizing
the particularities of the situation of each country.
Successful negotiations with the Andean
Community (involving Colombia, Ecuador and
Venezuela) set the stage for a common economic
space, capable of heralding a new chapter in our
integration efforts in the Continent. If we add to these
initiatives our growing links to Guyana and Suriname,
the emergence of a “South American Community of
Nations” – to borrow from President Alejandro
Toledo of Peru – does not look like a distant dream.
The importance of this process does not exhaust
itself in the expected trade benefits and increased
economic ties. More frequent and intense contacts
among governments in the region will help us in our
struggle against crime, drugs and illicit trade. It will
increase our political unity and strengthen our
negotiating capacity vis-à-vis other, more powerful
nations and groups of countries.
Most of all, it will help in intensifying the people to
people contact in an era in which restrictions based
on concerns about security or illegal immigration tend
to erect barriers between countries and whole regions.
Over the past year, all South American Heads of
State came to Brasilia on official visits. In each case
they were accompanied by several Ministers, allowing
for fruitful, result-oriented talks on wide-ranging
programmes for co-operation. President Lula has been to most of our South
American neighbours at least once, since taking office.
I am in touch with my colleagues in the region on a
frequent basis. Just to illustrate I have been five times
to Peru and three times to Colombia in the past year.
I have stopped counting the times that I have visited
our MERCOSUR partners. This is all unprecedented.
Past Governments had vowed to attribute priority to
South America – and important steps were taken in
this direction.
In practice, however, we had more people working
on the Free Trade Area of the Americas than on
strengthening MERCOSUR; we were less inclined
to think creatively about the Colombian conflict, for
example, than to react to plans designed by others.
Today we have revived MERCOSUR, concluded
trade agreements with almost all other countries in
the Continent, and become actively engaged in the
not always easy search for stability in Venezuela,
Bolivia, Colombia, in a spirit in which our traditional
attachment to non-interference in the internal affairs
of others is tempered by what I like to call “non-
indifference”.
South America is therefore our first priority. But
let me touch now upon other aspects of Brazil’s
foreign policy. In so doing, I would like to distinguish
between two sets of cases: (a) on the one hand,
situations that are part of the international agenda,
irrespective of our will; and (b) on the other hand,
our effort to reshape the international agenda – albeit
in a limited way – with a view to creating a world
more conducive to international co-operation for
peace and development.
The security challenges stemming from September
11th and the current Iraqi crisis clearly fall into the
first category. International terrorism is at the forefront
of the international agenda, whatever we may think
of its causes, or of the most effective way of coping
with it. It concerns us all, whether our countries have
been directly targeted or not. To Brazilians, the death
of our compatriot Sergio Vieira de Mello and his
colleagues, at the UN Office in Baghdad, stands as a
painful reminder.
As I speak today, we are still under the shock of
yet another heinous attack against innocent civilians,
in Madrid. Brazil has been pressing for enhanced
international co-operation to combat international
terrorism at two levels: (a) firstly, to carry out
repressive measures against terrorist organizations
and organized crime, through judicial agreements,
intelligence sharing, closer contacts among law
enforcement and police institutions in accordance with
multilateral precepts and international law; (b)
secondly, to promote tolerance, democratic values
and greater attention to terrorism’s social and
economic roots. In joining forces, we should take
into account the vast body of international law at our
disposal and work multilaterally, mainly through the
UN system, but also through regional organizations,
to improve our preventive capacity.
By contrast, the idea of preemption seems to create
as many problems as it seeks to resolve. Without entering
into a detailed debate on the matter, I would venture to
say that, in the absence of a multilaterally negotiated
approach, the concept of pre-emptive military action to
forestall imminent threats will never enjoy international
legitimacy.
And when I say multilateral I am referring to the
United Nations Security Council. As President Lula
has stated before the UN General Assembly, “a world
in which the use of force is not based on agreed
multilateral rules and understandings will be
intrinsically unstable and structurally insecure”.
In the first months of 2003, President Lula took a
series of initiatives, in order to contribute to a
diplomatic solution to the Iraqi crisis. On the basis of
a set of ideas floated by the Gulf States, he kept in
touch with Secretary General Kofi Annan, and
Security Council members with a view to obtaining
Iraqi compliance with its international obligations while
preserving the authority of the Security Council. Even
after the war was initiated, he persisted in his
diplomatic efforts, which included contacts with Pope
John Paul II. Today, we remain concerned with the level of
violence in Iraq, and more broadly in the Middle East.
As the first Latin American Head of State to speak
before the Arab League, President Lula made clear,
during his stay in Cairo last year, that Brazil stands
ready to participate in a renewed diplomatic effort
towards peace in the region. With this objective in
mind we will shortly be establishing a diplomatic
mission at Ramallah, and I will be appointing a Special
Envoy to the Middle East. We also intend to reopen
our Embassy in Baghdad as soon as Iraq recovers
its sovereignty.
As the country with the biggest number of people
of Arab descent and a dynamic and highly influential
Jewish community – both living peacefully side by
side – Brazil thinks it can be of some assistance in
efforts that have been deployed by the international
community, while fully recognizing the complexities
of this task.
In parallel, we are responding constructively and
creatively – I hope – to Kofi Annan’s invitation to
look at contemporary threats to peace and reshape
collective security. This implies looking at two
interlinked aspects of UN reform: (a) enhancing the
capacity of the Security Council to confront the current
challenges to international peace and security, among
them those posed by international terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction; (b) imparting the
necessary legitimacy and representativeness to the
Security Council so that it may carry out its enhanced
responsibilities with greater effectiveness and broader
international support. The outcome of the discussions
of the “Blue Ribbon Panel”, under UN Secretary-
General’s auspices, will help us focus on a new
compact among UN member States. We have before
us a historic opportunity to preserve and strengthen
collective security, in a context which has been aptly
described as “no less decisive than 1945 itself, when
the United Nations was founded”.
We are prepared to take up this challenge – and
this is a matter which I intend to pursue in my contacts
at the Foreign Office.
82
A reformed Security Council with new permanent
members from the developing world has become an
urgent necessity. In the economic sphere, President
Chirac’s initiative to promote an expanded dialogue
between the G-8 and emerging economies from
Africa, Asia and Latin America is a step in the right
direction. We hope his example will be followed and
may lead to more permanent arrangements.
As we continue to strive towards these goals, we
remain acutely aware that their attainment depends –
to a large extent – on a more forthcoming attitude on
the part of key actors in the developed world. But
we remain optimistic. To our mind, all those genuinely
committed to democratic values must join in the effort
to promote more democratic decision-making
processes at the world level.
Just as History has taught us to mistrust the false
idol of autocratic efficiency, we should be wary of
dispensing with the search for consensus, through
dialogue and consultation, within multilateral
frameworks. Instead, we must work together to
perfection existing mechanisms and develop new
ones. Unilateral actions may appear to bring speedier
results. And this may well be the case. But most of
the time, they are short-lived and lack legitimacy.
Of course, that does not mean that Brazil will
hesitate to act individually, or in co-ordination with
like-minded partners to promote vital interests
relevant to humankind as a whole. I will refer to two
of them, which are in fact interlinked: combating
hunger and ensuring that developing countries are
provided with a level playing field in international trade.
In many ways these projects involve a certain
reconfiguration of the world’s commercial and
diplomatic geography.
The same impulse which leads us to strengthen
our South American unity can also be found in other
initiatives such as “IBSA” – the newly established
India, Brazil, South Africa trilateral forum that came
to be known as the G-3. Bringing together three great
democracies of the South, one in each continent, the
G-3 can play a useful role as a magnet for co-operation among developing countries and as a force
for dialogue – which is different from confrontation –
with the rich North.
In the same spirit, we have been coordinating a
Group of 20 agricultural exporters from the developing
world – the G-20 – which made its appearance at
the WTO Ministerial Conference in Cancún as a voice
in favour of freer trade in agriculture and against the
billions spent on trade-distorting agricultural subsidies.
It is not an exaggeration to say that the G-20 for the
first time in trade negotiations brought home a twin
message on trade liberalisation and social justice.
Hunger, which affects one fourth of the world’s
population, of which 300 million are children, has been
described by President Lula as the biggest and
deadliest weapon of mass destruction. According to
UN calculations, as many as 24 thousand individuals
a day perish due to hunger related causes. At a recent
gathering in Geneva, with the UN Secretary General,
Kofi Annan, and Presidents Chirac, of France, and
Lagos, of Chile, President Lula took the lead in
proposing a new international drive to combat hunger.
The objective is to raise financial resources to invest
in projects in areas such as agriculture, health and
education. Several ideas and initiatives have been put
forward, both as to how the resources should be
tapped and as to how they should be better used. In
addition to the facility established last year by India,
Brazil and South Africa – under the United Nations
Development Programme – other proposals deserve
to be examined and made operational.
In this context we welcome Chancellor of the
Exchequer Gordon Brown’s idea of an International
Finance Facility that would anticipate, through a
system of bonds, the materialization of the
commitments made by donor countries. It is President
Lula’s intention to organise a meeting of Heads of
State and Government immediately before the
opening of this year’s United Nations General
Assembly to take stock and plan ahead.
The WTO Round of Trade negotiations, launched
in 2001, raised legitimate expectations for a more
development-friendly trading environment. Of central
importance was the possibility of bringing agriculture
into the mainstream of the multilateral trading system
– thereby putting an end to the regime of exceptions
and waivers that protect inefficient producers in rich
countries and castigate competitive exporters from
the developing world.
At the WTO Ministerial in Cancún, co-ordination
among a representative group of developing
countries, with a special interest in agriculture,
succeeded in preventing attempts to dilute the
ambitious Doha mandate. The G-20 represents 22%
of world agricultural production, 70% of rural workers
and 60% of world population. Last December the
G-20 met in Brasilia, at ministerial level, in the presence
of WTO Director-General Supachai Panitchpakdi
and European Trade Commissioner Pascal Lamy.
Unfairly blamed for Cancún’s stalemate, the G-
20 is now recognised as a constructive and
indispensable interlocutor for moving the Doha
process forward. I am gratified that the United States
Trade Representative, Bob Zoellick, is engaged in a
new offensive to place the WTO trade talks back on
track and look forward to an accelerated pace in the
negotiations in Geneva.
As has become apparent in other important trade
liberalisation exercises, such as the FTAA, the WTO
remains the principal forum for tackling trade issues
such as agricultural subsidies and anti-dumping rules.
Let me give you another example of what I mean by
reshaping the international agenda. When President
Lula took office, fourteen months ago, the FTAA
negotiations had been proceeding under a framework
which was highly unfavourable to Brazil and
MERCOSUR.
Issues of priority concern such as agricultural
subsidies and antidumping rules have been set aside
– under the pretext that they could be dealt with in
the Doha Round – while over-ambitious commitments
– disproportionate to those under consideration in
the WTO – were being sought in areas, such as
intellectual property rights, government procurement, investment rules, as well as a framework for trade in
services that departs from the GATT. All these would
impact directly on our latitude to promote
development-oriented policies.
Thanks to a collective effort, a compromise was
struck which allowed us to rebalance the negotiating
framework at the Miami Ministerial Conference, last
November, setting the stage for mutually beneficial
outcomes, based on what a Free Trade Area should
really aim at: access to markets.
Before concluding, I would like to refer to our
relation with Europe. In Brazil we consider the current
MERCOSUR-European Union negotiations for the
conclusion of a trade agreement as strategically
important. In addition to the potential commercial
gains and strengthened economic partnerships, at stake
is the notion of ensuring a healthy multipolarity in our
trade relations with the developed world. Our trade with
Europe is growing at a much faster pace than that with
other parts of the developed world.
At the political level, we have been experiencing a
new and increasingly vibrant dialogue with individual
countries in the EU as well as with the Commission. I
have not only been regularly in touch with Pascal Lamy
– in Brasilia and in Europe – but have had fruitful talks
on a wide range of issues with Commissioners Chris
Patten and Javier Solana – who will be coming to Brazil
84
next month. President Lula has developed close ties with
a number of European leaders, including Prime Minister
Tony Blair with whom he had the opportunity of
exchanging ideas on progressive governance last year.
I have referred to President Chirac’s amplified G-8
dialogue last year in Evian – which included Brazil – and
his participation in President Lula’s project on fighting
hunger. Spain is the second largest investor in Brazil,
and a “strategic partner”. President Lula has visited Berlin
and Lisbon and remains in frequent contact with the
leaders of both Germany and Portugal.
In many respects Europe represents a model and an
inspiration for our own integration efforts within
MERCOSUR and South America. I am certain that both
regions will greatly benefit from increased economic,
political and cultural ties. For my part, as a former
Ambassador to the United Kingdom, and as someone
who owes a lot to this country and, in particular, this
institution, I retain not only a professional but also a
personal interest in developing relations with our British
counterparts, in all fields: diplomatic, economic, cultural,
educational.
I am thus very happy to be in London for a busy
agenda, which includes not only this stimulating gathering
at LSE, but also contacts with Foreign Secretary Jack
Straw, the press, and the private sector.
Thank you 
