Brasil - África do Sul

Discurso do Ministro de Estado das Relações Exteriores,
Embaixador Luiz Felipe Lampreia, por ocasião do almoço
que oferece ao Ministro dos Negócios Estrangeiros da
República da África do Sul, Alfred Nzo. Brasília, 9 de
outubro de 1995.


On behalf of the Brazilian government, I want
to extend our warmest welcome to you and to your
distinguished delegation. Your visit to Brasilia is a solid
demonstration of South Africa’s interest in its
partnership with Latin America, particularly with
Brazil, and we deeply appreciate it.
South Africa and Brazil have so much in
common, so many shared interests and so intense a
partnership to expand and consolidate, that we place
relations with your country among our main foreign
policy objectives.
I am very glad to meet you again to continue
the talks we had during my trip to South Africa earlier
this year. I think this exchange of visits, in such a short
period of time, is extremely meaningful. We are
building relations that are bound to be productive.
We are two significant democratic societies, two
major developing economies which are undergoing a
creative and imposing era of transformation and
sustained growth, which are confidently and openly
integrating into their regions and into the global
economy. We sincerely hope that President Nelson
Mandela will be able to visit Brazil again in the near
future, this time as the South African Head of State.
An exchange of presidential visits can culminate a
process of careful build up of relations between our
two countries and our two regions Mr. Minister,
You are familiar with Brazil’s proud cultural
and ethnic links with Africa. We owe Africa much of
what we are as a people, as a Nation. As you travel
in Brazil, you can feel this African heritage at every
corner, you can sense it in every instance of our
national life. And, when we talk about Africa and our
African heritage, South Africa shines with a special
glow. Since long ago, South Africa has captured the
attention and the interest of Brazilians.
We know the physical beauty and the cultural
riches of your country. We have followed your history.
We have supported South Africa’s courageous
struggle to eliminate Apartheid and to build a solid
democracy under the inspired leadership of President
Nelson Mandela.
We have welcomed the birth of a new partner
in Southern Africa, a partner that has gained
worldwide recognition thanks to the peaceful transition
that South Africans have been able to complete, to
the thrust that the South African economy has gained,
and to the potential of that emerging economy. South
Africa represents a special chapter of contemporary
international history, a success story of peaceful
change and of economic resurgence.
Your people have changed their own destiny,
they have given hope to the whole of the African continent.
That is why Brazilians are so proud to pay
their tribute to the people of South Africa. We know
that, across the Atlantic, we are distant neighbors,
but close friends. And we intend to build on this
friendship.
Mr. Minister,
Since the inauguration of President Mandela,
we have been working towards closer ties between
South Africa and Brazil. Our contacts have begun,
our business communities are becoming involved, our
trade is growing fast. There is an ongoing dialogue
between our two governments, a dialogue that is
already translating into action.
We are in the process of strengthening the
institutional framework of this relationship, as we
negotiate and sign bilateral agreements in the main
areas where cooperation and exchange are to be
fostered: investment, cultural and educational
exchange, the fight against and prevention of drug
trafficking, and consular affairs. The creation of a Joint
Commission for Cooperation will provide the
mechanism for advancing concrete initiatives in several
other areas. We have much to offer to one another.
Brazil has a long-standing experience in many areas
that are crucial to the current launching of a new phase
in South Africa’s social and economic development.
Housing, sanitation, public transportation, agricultural
development and research are just some prime
examples of areas where we can cooperate. South
Africa also has a wide experience in fields, such as
mining and tourism among others, that directly interest
us. And, of course, we have a vast international and
regional agenda to discuss and to coordinate on. As
countries with a broad international presence, our
interests go far beyond our own regions.
The reform of the United Nations and the
strengthening of its mechanisms to provide peace and
security in a changing world are at the center of
international attention, as we celebrate the
Organization’s fiftieth anniversary. We share many
interests in these matters and we should continue to
enhance our coordination and close consultation,
aiming at bringing the developing world’s view and
the unique perceptions of countries such as ours to
the process.
We also share many common interests as
regards peace and the resumption of growth in
friendly Southern African countries such as Angola
and Mozambique. We can do much together, as we
are doing in the context of the United Nations peace
keeping efforts, to fully support the implementation
of the Agreements that have opened the way for
democracy and development in these countries. As
members of SADC and Mercosul, respectively, South
Africa and Brazil can contribute to create and
strengthen ties between these two regional
communities, aiming at institutional arrangements that
will ultimately lead to larger and freer trade between
Southern Africa and Mercosul.
As South Atlantic countries, we should make
real the promises of partnership, cooperation and
close coordination embodied in the Zone of Peace
and Cooperation of the South Atlantic. The upcoming
IV Ministerial Meeting of the Zone of Peace and
Cooperation of the South Atlantic, to be held in March
of next year in Capetown, could provide a valued
opportunity to re-launch the initiative with specific and
concrete objectives in mind.
We could work together with other countries
of the region to provide leadership in advancing nonproliferation and nuclear disarmament in the whole
area of the Zone and to increase cooperation on
environmental issues, especially on the protection of
the marine environment.
Those are issues with high internal and
international visibility, where we can make a difference
and send strong signals. And we could enhance the
political coordination among the countries of the
region and develop meaningful cooperation with some
of the least developed of those countries.
Mr. Minister,
The friendship between South Africa and
Brazil has recently been given a living symbol to
represent it. The Brasilia Zoo has received two young
South African elephants, a generous gift offered by
the South African government to the people of
Brasilia. They arrived here on September 12th, and
since then they have been an attraction in this Capital,
especially for young children, who are visiting the Zoo
by the thousands just to see the young animals.
Tomorrow, when you go there, you will witness how
cheerful people are about these two new and friendly
guests. This symbol talks of a friendship that has
become as powerful, long-living and affectionate as
the elephants themselves. No symbol can endure if
reality doesn’t follow through, if the facts don’t
support the message. But we are doing our part, we
are generating the facts, we are working hard to make
this symbol of Brazilian-South African friendship a
mirror of what we accomplish as our two countries
stand closer. It is with this spirit that I ask all to raise
our glasses in a toast to the well-being and prosperity
of the people of South Africa, to the ever growing
friendship between our two countries, to the health
and personal happiness of President Nelson Mandela
and of our good friend Alfred Nzo.
Thank you.