Debate Temático do Conselho de Segurança das
Nações Unidas sobre Contra-Terrorismo
Discurso do Ministro Celso Amorim no Debate Temático
do Conselho de Segurança das Nações Unidas sobre
Contra-Terrorismo - Nova York, 27/09/2010
(Original em inglês)
Mister President, 
I would like to commend Minister
Davutoglu and the Turkish presidency for
convening this debate on terrorism. 
Terrorism is a scourge that haunts our time.
There are no excuses for terrorist acts, which
inflict suffering and fear indiscriminately. 
Brazil has always condemned terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. Our
Constitution enshrines the repudiation of
terrorism as a fundamental principle of our
international relations. Brazil is party to
all relevant international conventions and
protocols against terrorism. 
As a serious global threat, terrorism must be
addressed from a holistic approach, with full
consideration of the complexity of its root causes. 
Violence and intolerance take root in an
environment of longstanding social, political,
economic and cultural injustices. Social and
economic development - accompanied by an
atmosphere of respect for the other - is the
best antidote to terrorism. 
In combating terrorism, Brazil has a strong
preference for truly multilateral agreements
and arrangements. It is important to reinforce
the UN’s capacity in this field. 
Brazil fully supports the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
appreciate the fact that this Strategy is inspired
by a comprehensive perspective. 
We must guard against dangerous rhetoric
and postures that fuel xenophobia and
prejudice. Tolerance is key to avoid violent
polarization and extremism. Initiatives such
as the UN Alliance of Civilizations can
have a role in this regard. Our Declaration
appropriately makes reference to that. 
In the 2003 Conference on combating
terrorism, held here in New York,  President
Lula stressed that the terrorist’s motivations
cannot be countered only by repression.
Diplomatic initiatives based on International
Law are also essential. 
Brazil emphasizes the urgent need to
conclude the negotiations of a United Nations
comprehensive counter-terrorism convention.
  Special attention must be given to the
relation of organized crime and the financing
of terrorism. 
There is also a growing concern that terrorists might have access to weapons
of mass destruction, especially to nuclear
weapons. At the Nuclear Security Summit
in Washington last April, President Lula
reaffirmed that - without prejudice to the
indispensable security measures that need
to be taken - the most effective manner to
reduce the risks of nuclear devices falling in
the wrong hands is the total and irreversible
elimination of all nuclear arsenals. 
Mister President, 
This Council has a unique role both in
responding to and preventing terrorism. Our
strongest contribution to fight terrorism would
be to attain just and sustainable solutions to
longstanding agenda items. Peacebuilding
efforts can also help avert the spread of
radicalism in countries already affected by
conflicts and social strife. 
Cooperation and capacity building in
relation to security measures, as well as
broader information sharing, are essential.
I reiterate Brazil’s full support to the
initiatives undertaken by the Security Council
committees to facilitate technical assistance
to countries that request it. Brazil is ready to
cooperate with other countries in this regard. 
It is our common duty to prevent and combat
terrorism.  Counter-terrorism strategies must
be predicated on the rule of law and the full
protection of human rights of all involved. 
The full realization of universal human
rights – including the right to development –
must be an integral part of all efforts to combat
the terrorist threat. 
For all these reasons, Brazil is
fully committed to a coordinated and
multidimensional response to all the challenges
posed by terrorism.  The UN should be at the
forefront of this endeavor.
 Thank you.
