Abertura do Seminário de Villa D’este

Pronunciamento do Ministro de Estado das Relações
Exteriores, Embaixador Luiz Felipe Lampreia, por ocasião
da abertura do Seminário de Villa D’este (Itália), sobre o
tema “Latin America And Brazil: After The Storm”, Villa
D´Este, 1º de setembro de 1996

I am very glad to have the unique opportunity
to take part in this important workshop and to present
my views on the most significant developments in Latin
America and Brazil over the past twelve months.
Much has happened during this brief period,
and we must be careful not to interpret events by
what they seem on the surface. Everyone knows that
the way of the financial market is to react swiftly to
both positive and negative scenarios, and that this
frequently leads to overrated expectations one way
or another. What we need to do is to make a sober
evaluation of underlying economic factors and
conditions, for it often shows that the truth is neither
as good nor as bad as imagined, but is usually
somewhere in the middle.
This, in a few words, is what happened to
international perceptions about Latin America - and,
to a certain extent, about Brazil - before and after the
recent financial market crisis. If prior to the devaluation
of the Mexican peso in December of 1994 Latin
America was being generally perceived as a new
haven for foreign capital, the ensuing difficulties that
afflicted countries of the region with more or less
intensity led to immediate capital flight in fear of a
widespread economic debacle.
As it turns out, the financial market crisis
proved that Latin America was not the financial
sanctuary that had been loudly advertised, but nor
did the region’s economies collapse one after the other
from structural weakness, as some had prematurely
foreshadowed. While the effects and lessons of the
financial market crisis are certainly not circumscribed
to Mexico alone, they have prompted a much needed
evaluation of the political and economic reform
process undergone by the region over the last few
years. And the conclusion that can be drawn, taking
into account the particularities of each country,
certainly allows for optimism, especially with regard
to Brazil.
In order to shed some light on the events of
recent months, I thought it would be useful to briefly
outline some of the main characteristics of the reform
process undergone by Latin America over the last
few years, for they provide a unique insight into the
events of recent months.
1) Democracy
The first important aspect to have in mind
when looking at the changes that have taken place in
Latin America is that political reform preceded
economic reform in almost every country. By the end
of the 1980’s, democracy had been restored
practically everywhere, putting an end to authoritarian
regimes that, in some cases - like Brazil itself -, dated
back twenty years.
Economic stagnation, as a result of the
exhaustion of the import substitution development
model, and the debt crisis were the essential factors behind the erosion of authoritarian rule in the region.
By the early nineties, when economic reform is finally
undertaken by the vast majority of Latin American
countries, democracy was firmly in place in many of
them.
Democracy has in some places served the
purpose of cleaning up the political way of life, through
greater accountability of governmental action.
And, if it is true that some democracies in Latin
America have faced difficulties, it is important to notice
that they have been dealt with on strictly constitutional
bases, as the option of a regression to authoritarian
rule is no longer viable. Thus, democracy in Latin
America translates, in the medium and long-terms,
into stability, a much valued international asset.
I want to emphasize that this implies an
important break with the past, when economic policies
were planned and executed with little concern for
public opinion. The fact is that many reformers of the
1990’s have risen to power through the democratic
process and have generally counted on the support
of large constituencies for their ideas, not only
facilitating their implementation but also according
them greater legitimacy.
The genuine belief that economic reform was
the road to development and social progress found
extraordinary expression among Latin Americans in
general, and is one of the core elements that
differentiates this reform process from those that
preceded it. This change in behavior is graphically
illustrated by the vastly different reactions to the 1982
and 1994 financial crises. In 1982, the majority of
Latin American countries reacted to the Mexican debt
crisis by adopting more protectionist, statist and
nationalistic policies, while what we have seen in 1995
is a deepening of reforms in the region with the general
support of populations.
If this remarkable change is due to some
extent to the political considerations I have just
described, economic conditions also played a decisive
role in determining the course of action undertaken
early this year by many Latin American countries.
2) Latin America and the Washington Consensus
As I have pointed out, economic reform
generally followed political reform in Latin America.
Not only that, but it also took place amidst rapidly
changing international realities, in which the demise
of real socialism proved to be inversely proportional
to a renewed faith in free market capitalism. This came
to be referred to as the “Washington consensus”,
which basically meant a general agreement that the
road to economic success for developing countries
laid in free market policies - trade liberalization,
privatization, fiscal balance, and a stable exchange
rate - allied with a strong currency.
But this moment also coincided with a
particularly favorable set of circumstances in
international financial markets. Interest rates in
developed countries were low, especially in the United
States, and there was a surplus of capital looking for
a safe port. Not only that, the structure of investment
was changing, as individuals and enterprises looked
increasingly towards stocks, bonds and mutual funds.
It was in this context that most Latin American
countries engaged in economic reform in the early
1990’s. Foreign capital saw in this process
extraordinary opportunities for large profits, as the
implementation of free market policies produced
immediate macroeconomic effects in previously
stagnated economies. The subsequent result was a
huge inflow of capital into emerging markets as a
whole, and those of Latin America in particular.
This flow of investment to the region was a
mixed blessing. On the positive end, it helped to
eliminate internal opposition to the reform process
and served as an incentive for the spread of reforms
to neighboring countries, as it became clear that
economic policies along free market lines were
rewarded by foreign investment. On the negative end,
it delayed the implementation of deeper structural
reform, as arriving foreign capital was used to finance
balance of payment deficits, easing the political cost
of economic reform. This increased substantially the
dependence of reforming countries on international capital flows.
When events in Mexico led to a confidence
crisis among investors, capital flight was immediate
and of immense proportions, as much of it was
composed of highly volatile short-term portfolio
investment. This flight was not limited to Mexico
alone. Most countries of the region, including Brazil,
saw their access to foreign capital considerably
restricted in the first trimester of 1995.
However, contrary to what was initially
forecasted, the withdrawal of investors from the region
did not lead to widespread economic chaos. Latin
American countries, with more or less difficulty, have
managed to maintain the course of their reforms and
are, in general, recovering from the setbacks of the
first hours.
3) Brazilian reform: why there is a difference
This brings me now to economic reform in
Brazil, which has some particulars that set it apart
from the general process in Latin America as I have
described it.
First of all, Brazil is a relative latecomer to
economic reform along freemarket lines when
compared to countries like Chile, Argentina and
Mexico, which began their respective reform
processes earlier. It is true that the initial steps toward
liberalization in Brazil were taken back in 1990, but
these were not nearly as encompassing as what was
being done in other Latin American countries. It was
only in 1994, with the introduction of the Real Plan,
that Brazil finally and fully engaged itself in an organic
economic reform process.
This “delay” can be partly attributed to an
internal political situation that involved the
impeachment of a President - an ordeal, by the way,
that contributed much to the strengthening of Brazil’s
democratic institutions. But, more than anything, it
reflected the natural timing of the democratic debate
regarding free-market economic reform in a country
of great social complexity such as ours. Nevertheless,
it was common in those days to see references to
Brazil as “Latin America’s white elefant”. It was
thought by some that, while other countries of the
region raced toward integration into the international
economy, Brazil was condemning itself to economic
backwardness.
As later events came to show, the deliberate
pace we established actually consolidated the overall
character of our reform process. I will try to explain
the reasoning behind this affirmation in the context of
the Latin American scenario.
In comparison to what was happening in other
Latin American countries that were already far along
the reform process, Brazil was not benefitted by the
large flows of foreign capital into Latin America during
the early years of the decade. This certainly
contributed to the “white elephant” image, but it also
forced us to look carefully for our own solutions to
certain problems and to craft a clear economic
strategy.
The Real Plan translates this strategy into
practice. It basically seeks to modernize the Brazilian
economy, preparing the country for deep integration
into international capital, trade and technology flows.
The Plan is based on a stable currency and an open
economy, to be achieved on a long-term basis through
a profound transformation of Brazilian economic
structures.
The introduction of a new currency, the Real,
was at the center of our economic strategy, but it
was preceded by measures aimed at setting the
appropriate groundwork, such as balancing public
finances and resolving the internal and external debt
problems, as well as tight controls over monetary and
exchange policy.
As a result, inflation in Brazil - which at almost
50% a month had reached levels that were seriously
disrupting the functioning of the national economy -
dropped to an average of just 2% a month over the
first year of the Real, the lowest indicators in over 20
years. In the first semester of 1995, inflation barely
surpassed 11%. Economic growth accelerated
substantially to 7.8% from July 1994 to June of this year, compared to 3.5% in 1992.
Consumption soared as the end of the
“inflationary tax” raised purchasing power levels,
especially for lower income segments. Economic
activity indicators were at an all-time high, as industrial
growth over the first year of the Real reached 9.6%.
Investment went up from 13% of GDP in 1992 to
almost 19% earlier this year.
These numbers are eloquent and provide
ample reason for optimism about the future. However,
there is a clear conscience in Brazil that these
advances, although a major and irreversible step
forward, are not enough to sustain economic stability
in the long run.
We have thus moved immediately to the more
complicated process of structural reform of the
Brazilian economy. Restrictions on foreign capital have
been eliminated. Areas formerly closed to foreign
investment, such as telecommunications, energy and
oil, have been opened up. Market reserves in the
shipping and mining sectors have been abandoned.
We are confronting the task of modernizing
the public sector, through social security reform, tax
reform, more intense privatization and concessions
of public services to the private sector. We believe
that this package will create the necessary conditions
for Brazil to successfully compete for investment,
technology and markets on a global scale.
It will also allow us to promote better income
distribution and to integrate marginalized segments
of the population into the Brazilian market, fostering
far-reaching economic development with social
justice.
4) Prospects for Brazil and Latin America
An analysis of the Brazilian case shows
therefore that our reform process was not subject to
the self-reinforcing cycle which led to the speculative
bubble that burst in December of 1994. Exactly
because we were latecomers to the reform process,
we survived the financial crisis relatively unscathed.
The loss of currency reserves in the first
trimester - some US$ 5 billion, basically in shortterm portfolio investment - has been subsequently
compensated by larger gains over the last four
months, which have placed our reserves at the
comfortable level of over US$ 40 billion.
This is an important development, for it clearly
shows that investor confidence in Brazil has not
waned, even after the financial crisis. Our reform
process has proven to have solid foundations, and
the evident political will to push ahead with it is
reflected in the positive market perception of Brazil.
This, in turn, reinforces and is reinforced by
the Latin American recovery from the reality check
of December last. As I said earlier, fundamental
political and economic conditions in the region are
vastly different from previous decades. Democracy
is firmly rooted and sustains the commitment to
economic and social reform.
Furthermore, Latin America is irrevocably
moving towards economic integration. Mercosur is
probably today’s most dynamic regional integration
scheme. Its four member countries, Brazil, Argentina,
Paraguay and Uruguay, have eliminated barriers to
intrazonal trade — which multiplied threefold in just
over three years, soaring to over US$ 10 billion. The
positive effects of integration have given individual
economies an added boost in terms of better
competitiveness and productivity.
Mercosur is already negotiating the future
participation of Chile and Bolivia, in what we see as
necessary steps toward a larger free trade area in the
Continent. Talks with the European Union are also
very advanced on the way to an interregional free
trade zone aimed at strengthening Mercosur’s
balanced foreign trade.
In addition, we have set in motion the process
for full Hemispheric integration by the year 2005, as
decided during the Miami Summit of last year. This
generates positive prospects for the region as a whole,
as it points to trade liberalization that can be a catalyst
for sustained economic growth. It is important that
this process be open, and fully in line with the provisions of the WTO, a true complement to the
multilateral trade system. Integration is a process of
addition, not subtraction. For it to be successful, it
must be gradual, and take into account existing
subregional schemes such as Mercosur and Nafta.
This all adds up to one conclusion: Brazil has
just cause for optimism about the future, based not
on overrated expectations, but on solid national
economic performance and generally favorable
regional and international conditions.
As the “tequila effect” fades and Latin America
awakens from the financial crisis, much of the smoke
has been cleared away. Gone are the misperceptions.
In their place, a sober and differential evaluation of
the possibilities for the countries of the region. And,
as a whole, it can be said that prospects are good.
Of course, the financial euphoria of the first
half of the decade will not repeat itself. Foreign capital
will be much more selective. Investment will follow
economic success; and economic success will depend
on the ability to move forward with structural reform.
One thing is for certain: there is no reversing
the trend of free market reform. The “Washington
consensus” may have been a moment of exagerated
optimism, but the truth is that strong currencies allied
with liberalization, privatization and deregulation are
the only viable option for economic development.
Latin America is aware of this. Brazil, in particular is
aware of this.
Today, the “white elephant” image is gone.
As economic stabilization in Brazil proves to be more
than just a passing trend, one fact is becoming
increasingly clear for the eye to see: the latecomer is
now ahead of the pack.
Thank you