Intervenção do Embaixador
Ernesto Araújo, Ministro das
Relações Exteriores do Brasil,
no “Dia do Brasil”, na Câmara
de Comércio dos Estados
Unidos, Washington, em 18 de
março de 2019 – Inglês
A new Brazil-US relationship can
displace and replace the axis of the
global order.
That displacement and replacement is
already taking place.
It is not the economy or military power
that determine the structure of the
global order, but ideas. It is ideas that
determine if and how a country exerts
its power. There are countries which are
economically and militarily powerful,
but where the spirit doesn’t blow.
We are displacing the axis of global
order in many ways: through our
commitment to democracy (true
commitment, not only lipservice, as we
show in the case of Venezuela), through an open economy, and through shared
values, mostly those that are called
conservative values.
For almost 30 years now we have seen
in the world a liberal, globalized
economy, which is great, but it lies on
top of a total absence of values, or on
top of ideological values, those of what
is called political correctness. And this
is not working. This reliance on no
values, or on the wrong set of values, is
taking the liberal global economy
towards a world where the liberal
democracies will not be the dominant
powers.
Something is wrong there. In the past,
free trade served the purposes of
freedom. Today, I am not sure this is the
case. Free trade is essential, but free
trade must, once more, be brought to
serve freedom. A liberal economy can
only be based on liberty, it cannot be an
instrument against liberty.
The best hope we have today is to create
a solid amalgam uniting an open, competitive, liberal economy, with the
basis of conservative values.
We must break the perverse amalgam of
the free economy with an ideological
structure which is opposite to freedom.
And we must prepare a new amalgam of
liberal economy and conservative
values, which means, an open economy
and an open society. A society built
around political correctness is
essentially a closed society, where
thought is closed from sentiment, where
the road between man and God is
blocked, where words are locked away
from reality. A society built around
conservative values is organic, it is an
open system where different things can
happen which could not be deduced
from the terms of the system, where
contact with tradition can generate true
innovation. Tradition means openness
because tradition is the accumulation of
lived experience, and lived experienced
is necessarily open to the unknown, to
the numinous, to the marvelous. In the
politically correct realm nothing is
numinous, nothing is spontaneous,
nothing is even remotely marvelous.
The blend of open economy and
conservative values can only be
performed inside a nation. The nation is
the alchemical vase where trade and
tradition can merge. The nation is still
the only space where open economy and
free society can blend. Because the
nation is natural, as their shared
etymology indicates.
Conservative values give rise to a
healthy society, a cohesive and coherent
society where people are happy
together, and their community is built
on mutual trust, not just by an accident
of being thrown together in the same
territory.
The policitally correct ideology gives
rise to a society which is fragmented,
where different groups hate each other,
whithout nationhood, without a sense of belonging, where being a citizen of a
certain country means no more than
having a piece of paper which entitles
you to some benefits, without any
deeper feeling associated to it.
The West, after 1989, got used to not
thinking. To take society and culture for
granted, and to concentrate only on
economic management. Societies lost
their capacity to generate meaning. The
economy and the search for
competitiveness cannot generate
meaning, cannot fill someone’s heart.
If there is no nation, no family, no
culture, history, heroes, or tradition, the
economy cannot fill your heart, and
your heart will be occupied by ideology.
The indifference to the realm of values
and sentiment brought us to where we
are today (or to where we were until
yesterday, as we are beginning to
change that). Brought us to a situation
where the economy, the liberal world
order, is indifferent to liberty and
democracy.
This is essential: the liberal economy
without democracy has no future.
In Brazil, it is clear today that the liberal
economic reforms can only be achieved
if they are coupled with a solid
conservative basis in civil society. We
are lucky in that regard, because in
Brazil the people who advocate for
conservative causes like family values,
gun ownership, who have a pro-life
stance and who want an assertive
foreign policy defending democracy and
freedom are, most often, the same
people who want an open economy, the
rule of law, a political compact with no
room for corruption.
Liberal economic reforms have been
tried before in Brazil, but never
succeeded, because there was no strong
social basis to put pressure on the
politicians. It’s simply that. Only a
conservative, patriotic agenda can mobilize people to exert that pressure
for the economic reforms.
A system will never reform itself from
within. Only from the outside is that
possible, only on the basis of meaning
and feeling, only around the flag and the
faith can the system be truly changed
and reformed. Only under the leadership
of an outsider like President Jair
Bolsonaro can the system be
challenged, as it’s happening today.
So we want economic opening and, for
the first time, we think we can deliver it because we have a leader from outside
the system, and because the people are
mobilized.
And for that process of economic
opening, the best partner is the United
States, as the Brazil-US Investment
Map prepared by the Brazilian export
and investment promotion agency
APEX is showing. Because the United
States is an open economy, where the
private sector is the main player, and an
open society, a country that has blended
together freedom and competitiveness
along all its history.
