Cúpula de Chefes de Estado e de Governo do
Conselho de Segurança das Nações Unidas
Discurso do Ministro Celso Amorim na Cúpula de Chefes
de Estado e de Governo do Conselho de Segurança
das Nações Unidas – Nova York, 23/09/2010
Tema do Painel: “Ensuring the Security
Council an Effective Role in the Maintenance
of International Peace and Security”
(Original em ingles)
President Abdullah Gül, of the Republic of
Turkey,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would like to congratulate President
Gül on his initiative to hold this high-level
meeting. 
Sixty five years ago, the United Nations
was founded to prevent another war of great
proportions. For many, however, real peace has
never come about. Millions still live in a world
where conflict and poverty nurture each other. 
International efforts to promote stability
have been hindered by a narrow view, in
which peace was only seen as the absence of
armed conflict. 
Today it is clear that peace, security,
development, human rights and the rule of
law are interrelated. Peace can never flourish
where there is hunger and poverty. 
As much as an “exit strategy”,
peacekeeping operations must have a “strategy
of sustainability”. A strategy that would
deliver the real dividends of peace - stability,
development and strong national institutions. 
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding should, to
the extent possible, go hand in hand. 
Let me be clear: we are not advocating
that the Security Council be given a mandate
to promote development. But, in most cases,
the Security Council would benefit from the
advice of the Peacebuilding Commission. 
Other bodies of the UN system must also be
involved.  The coordination between the Security
Council and ECOSOC, foreseen in Article 65 of
the UN Charter, should be fully exercised. 
Mr. President, 
In Haiti, where Brazil is proud to have
contributed to the UN-led stabilization efforts,
it is clear that there will be no lasting peace
if extreme poverty and deprivation are not
adequately addressed. 
Real stability will only prevail if the window
of opportunity created by MINUSTAH is seized
to strengthen institutions and to improve the
living conditions of the Haitian people. 
This will require a deep involvement of the
different bodies dealing with economic and social matters, as well as of the international
financial institutions – all under appropriate
coordination by the UN.  
Guinea Bissau is another situation in
which poverty and institutional instability
hamper peace. The reforms needed by the
country, especially of its armed forces, will
require courageous decisions on the part
of its authorities, but cannot dispense with
substantial international cooperation. 
In order to achieve these combined goals,
proper attention by this Council is needed. 
Similarly, coordinated peacekeeping and
peacebuilding actions would also be of great
value in situations such as that of the DRC.  
Mr. President, 
Interaction with other UN bodies and the
ability to cope with complex situations are
indispensable to make the Security Council
more effective. But this is not enough. It needs
to be more representative and legitimate. It
must also make its working methods more
transparent.   
Security issues that concern the whole of
the international community cannot be dealt
with as the private domain of a limited number
of powers. 
Improving the effectiveness of the
Security Council depends also on the role
of the non-permanent members. They must
fully participate in the decision-making-
process. Non-permanent members can bring a
diversity of views and regional experiences to
the Council. It is not appropriate to call upon
them only to ratify decisions already taken by
the permanent members.   
It is also impossible to discuss the
Council’s effectiveness without addressing
the question of the veto. We are realistic.
We are not proposing to  abolish the veto.
However, imaginative formulas that make its
use more difficult or encourage self-restraint
are necessary. 
150
All of the measures listed above – a holistic
approach to crises, the reform of the Council’s
composition, increasing the role of the non-
permanent members, and restraining the use
of the veto – should contribute to make the
international community more engaged in the
Council’s decisions. 
It is essential that all member countries feel
not only bound to comply with its decisions,
but also politically interested in doing so. 
In other words, the effectiveness of the
Council depends, to a very large extent, on the
perception, by the international community,
of its legitimacy and representativeness.
 
Thank you.
