Sexta Conferência Ministerial da OMC
Discurso do Ministro das Relações Exteriores, Embaixador
Celso Amorim, na Sexta Conferência Ministerial da OMC,
em Hong Kong, China, em 14 de dezembro de 2005
Madam Chair,
I would like to thank the people and the
Government of Hong Kong, China, for the warm
hospitality and the arrangements for this Conference.
Trade liberalization can lead to prosperity
provided it proceeds in a balanced way and takes
into account the differentiated needs of poorer
countries. This has not been the case so far.
It is widely accepted that the multilateral
trading system suffers from a development deficit. The
launching of the Doha Development Agenda four
years ago was a recognition of this fact.
To a large extent, the development deficit
results from the inadequacy of the rules that apply to
agriculture as compared to other economic activities.
The agricultural gap compounds the development gap.
For some time, even after Doha, developed
countries tried to camouflage these realities. They
attempted to sell to the rest of the world a round on
the cheap.
In Cancun, developing countries had to raise
their voice against such a move. They stood firm
against a meagre agreement that would not even
scratch the structure of privileges and injustices built
into world trade, notably in agriculture.
Developing countries from Africa, Asia and
Latin America represent the majority of the world’s
rural population and a sizeable share of international
trade in agricultural products. Many of them have
joined forces to create the G-20, which includes large
agricultural exporters, countries that rely on family
agriculture and least developed countries, all with a
common objective: doing away with practices that
distort agricultural trade.
Subsidies and barriers in developed countries
suppress prices, displace production and threaten
livelihoods in developing nations. This is where reform
is most needed, and most urgently. Rich countries
cannot expect to receive payment for doing what they
should have done long ago. After so many years –
should I say decades or centuries? – remnants of
feudalism have been lingering on side by side with
other forms of unacceptable privileges. Poor countries
cannot wait for another twenty years to see true reform
in agricultural trade. The time to act is now.
All forms of distorting subsidies have to be
eliminated or drastically reduced. As far as domestic
subsidies are concerned, the overall level of support has
to be cut in real, not purely nominal, terms. Such cuts
must be accompanied by tight disciplines. The time has
come to define a precise end-date for export subsidies
and other equivalent forms of distorting measures.
Ensuring greater market access is also
essential, not only because of the direct interest to
developing countries but also because of the virtuous
cycle it can generate in relation to the other pillars of
the agricultural negotiations. Sensitivities in developing
countries as to food security, rural development and
the means of livelihood of their population have to be
properly addressed, lest they become an impediment to the forward movement we want to see in agricultural
trade as a whole.
We understand that the Doha round is not
about agriculture alone. But its mandate recognizes
that there are differentiated needs and responsibilities.
This must be translated into proportionate
commitments between agriculture and other market
access negotiations, namely services and industrial
goods. The major economies cannot expect more
concessions from developing countries than what
they are willing to offer. This would be tantamount to
S&D in the reverse. It just won’t happen.
We must also be sensitive to the needs of
those who face the greatest challenges. This is the
case of the LDCs and other small vulnerable
economies. This Round should result in a firm
commitment by developed countries to provide duty-
free and quota-free market access to products from
the LDCs on a stable and permanent basis, in a manner
that helps these countries to diversify their productive
base and free them from the bondage of unilateral,
unreliable and unstable favours.
To translate our commitment into practice,
Brazil, along with its Mercosul partners, is prepared
to move in the direction of duty-free and quota-free
access for products coming from LDCs, especially
from Africa and Latin America.
A central tenet of the G-20’s platform is our
concern with a fair and balanced process that reflects
the interests of the whole WTO membership. We are
pleased to see that this “bottom-up” approach has
been followed in the preparation of this Conference.
It is our hope that, after this Ministerial
Conference, the Round will have gained new
momentum, by means of credible and courageous
moves that will enable us to achieve ambitious results
in the short time that is left. To that end, the G-20 is
committed to arrive at full modalities by early April.
We cannot afford to see the Doha round fail
out of inaction or lack of vision. Its development
dimension has raised hopes and expectations in all
developing countries, large and small, LDC or
212
otherwise. Let us not miss this opportunity to promote
development.
Thank you.
