DISCURSO DO MINISTRO DAS RELAÇÕES EXTERIORES NA SESSÃO
PLENÁRIA DA CONFERÊNCIA MINISTERIAL DA OMC
04-12-2013 

O Chanceler brasileiro discursou hoje
na sessão de abertura da XI Conferência
Ministerial da OMC, que está sendo realizada
em Bali (Indonésia).
Discurso proferido pelo Ministro das
Relações Exteriores, Luiz Alberto Figueiredo
Machado, na Sessão Plenária da IX
Conferência Ministerial da OMC - Bali, 4 de
dezembro de 2013
(Versão em Português será disponibilizada
oportunamente)
Mr. Chairman,
Let me start by thanking Indonesia for its
hospitality and for the excellent arrangements
for this Ministerial Conference.
We also thank the Director-General,
Ambassador Roberto Azevêdo, for his efforts
to bring us together in paving the way for a
successful conclusion of our negotiations in
Bali.
Brazil is pleased that this Ministerial
Conference will welcome Yemen as its 160th
Member. We hope that the pending accession
processes will move swiftly, thereby taking
us closer to the objective of universal
membership.
Mr. Chairman,
We have seen, in the past few months,
a welcome reinvigoration of the WTO’s
negotiating pillar. Members have endeavored
to fnd common ground in spite of their
different interests and priorities. We still have
some sensitive issues to cover, but a positive
outcome is not out of reach. Brazil is confdent
that we will be able to arrive at a satisfactory
agreement this week.
We have worked constructively to shape the
agreement on trade facilitation. This common
endeavor coincides with efforts underway in
Brazil to reduce costs and streamline customs
procedures. These objectives are shared by
all Members. This agreement will entail,
however, implementation costs that may be
burdensome, especially for LDCs. Therefore,
the implementation of this agreement will
require political commitment to fulfll its
obligations as well as to provide developing
countries and LDCs with the technical
assistance and capacity building required.
We are also pleased that Members fully
recognize that reaching agreement on some
agricultural proposals, including a declaration
on export subsidies and an understanding on
TRQ administration, is a necessary part of any
early harvest to be agreed upon. Food security
is also an important element of our discussions. Actually, we had hoped for more than what has
proved possible at this time, since agriculture
remains the area where we fnd the most
glaring distortions in international trade, and
where liberalization can be the most benefcial
for developing countries.
Nevertheless, we believe that the
agreements to be approved by this Ministerial
Conference stand as a frm recognition of the
need to advance further in agricultural reform,
within the framework of the WTO. As we
look ahead, we must always emphasize the
central importance of Agriculture and issues
of interest to the LDCs.
We think it is essential to reach agreement
on a Bali package that is conducive to the
resumption of a broader agenda of negotiations.
We have devoted considerable effort to
advance in the Doha Development Agenda.
After Bali we cannot fail to address the core
issues related to the elimination of export
subsidies and reduction of domestic support
in agriculture, as well as to market access in
agriculture, NAMA and services.
Our constituencies cannot afford that the
WTO continue to nibble at the edges of this
central agenda. Taking on this agenda and
trying to fnd solutions that have eluded us for
so long will not be easy, but it must be done.
Much as we value what has already
been achieved in the preparations for this
conference, we must also be realistic and learn
the lessons from this experience.
First of all, I think that the early harvest
model has already run its course and should
not be repeated. We should now revert to a
more ambitious goal: leave the piecemeal
approach behind and restore the integrity of
our negotiating agenda. In other words, we
must go for a full harvest. The WTO can do it.
We are certainly prepared to make
adjustments to our agenda and look at new
issues of interest. Any move, however, must
be done with a clear sense of priorities. And
the frst priority remains the removal of the
most distorting trade measures, particularly
in agriculture, that hamper full integration of
developing countries in world trade. As some
Members point to the so-called 21st century
issues, we must always remind ourselves that
the unfnished business of the WTO is also a
21st century issue.
Mr. Chairman,
In the next three days, the world’s attention
will be drawn to this Conference. Let us take
this opportunity to adopt a balanced Bali
package and to mandate a post-Bali work
programme to advance the implementation of
the Doha Development Agenda.
Thank you