“Brazil ́s top diplomat fills out the plot line” –
Entrevista concedida pelo Embaixador Celso
Amorim, Ministro das Relações Exteriores (The
International Herald Tribune, 4 de dezembro
de 2004)
His strategy wins nation clout on the global
stage
BRASÍLIA - Foreign Minister Celso Amorim,
a cinema buff and former movie producer, likes to go
over a script in his mind of Brazil”s future.
In it, Brazil shakes its postcolonial insecurity
and takes the helm of South America to the United
Nations, where it lands a full-time seat on an enlarged
Security Council, along with its “kindred spirit,” India.
Latin America”s largest country also helps rewrite
rules about access to global agriculture markets.
Finally, it shrinks poverty for its 184 million residents
through stronger trade ties with Asia.
It is certainly a utopian vision - and one that
many would shrug off as yet another overly rosy
scenario for the historically crisis-wracked country.
But these days, Amorim’s vision is more than just an
imaginary script.
Since 2003, developing countries have come
together to form a powerful new bloc, the Group of
20-plus or the Group of 21, to fight for their interests
against wealthy nations at the World Trade
Organization. Together, they scored major new global
accords to end agricultural subsidies in August, about
the same time that poor countries also won courtroom
victories against subsidies for sugar in Europe and
cotton in the United States.
Brazil has also signed billions of dollars’ worth
of investment deals with China and other Asian
countries, a move that officials hope will bring a
stream of jobs and production to help offset the
country’s lingering problems of poverty and
development. And it has steered the South American
trading bloc, MERCOSUR, toward freer trade within
Latin America.
The soft-spoken Amorim, 62, with his salt-
and-pepper beard, can claim a great deal of credit for these victories. He maneuvered himself into a
position of influence during WTO talks this summer,
taking on the role of a spokesman for the Group of
20-plus, whose members joined forces to strengthen
their bargaining position in global trade. And, under
President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva”s stewardship,
Amorim has helped set a cooperative tone that has
big countries cozying up to Brazil.
“It”s been an exciting year,” Amorim said in a
recent interview, sitting in front of an enormous world
map in his office. “We accomplished many things
largely due to Lula”s image and leadership.”
Da Silva is credited with tackling tough
reforms while Brazil’s economy rebounded on
booming commodity sales and a strengthening
currency. Those forces are helping to bring
unemployment, inflation and interest rates down.
Amorim’s star - and Brazil’s - has been rising
along with that of da Silva, a former union leader and
metal worker who initially worried investors with his
leftist roots but won them over for his business-
friendly stance.
Wall Street is also enamored of Finance
Minister Antonio Palocci because of his fiscal
prudence. But it is Amorim who has maneuvered
skillfully to forge alliances with other countries that
are turning Brazil into a trade force to be reckoned
with.
“Amorim is a talented man, with extraordinary
command of the issues, and a tough negotiator,” said
Peter Hakim, president of Inter-American Dialogue,
a research group based in Washington.
“Brazil has been extremely effective at shaping
the trade agenda and giving leadership” to the Group
of 20-plus, Hakim added.
Things were not always so successful for
Amorim, an amiable, self-made man. In the 1960s,
he was swept up in Rio’s heady student movement at
the same time that he began his lifelong love of film.
He saw a role in his country’s government as the ideal
way to enact change.
Stories of racism, violence and poverty in his
favorite films of that era, like “Barren Lives” and “The
Grapes of Wrath,” inspired him at a time when social
movements like one for land reform also sparked his
streak of activism. He joined the External Relations
Ministry in 1965, but his activities were initially
confined to paper-pushing and postgraduate study
at the London School of Economics, where his thesis
focused on social change in Brazil. Amorim’s first
ministerial postings coincided with a new 20-year
military dictatorship.
Under a more relaxed but still military regime
in 1979, Amorim joined his love of film with civil
service in a role heading up the Brazilian Film Corp.,
a government-run entity.
But driven by a desire to reveal the truth,
Amorim said, he approved financing for a film on
torture in the early years of Brazil’s military
dictatorship, a move that ultimately cost him that post.
After languishing in what he calls a “period of
obscurity,” he was ultimately able to shift within
government to dealing with social issues. Over time,
his dossier widened to include issues ranging from
tobacco control, labor reform, sustainable
development, disarmament and peace. His big break
came in 1993, when a boss’s illness created an
opening for him as External Relations Minister. There,
Amorim cut his teeth as Brazil’s global representative.
Amorim is most proud of his recent
achievements: helping to create MERCOSUR, the
agricultural victory this year for poor nations at the WTO,
and helping poorer countries win the right to buy cheaper
life-saving medicines without violating patents.
He has pushed a number of issues until they made
their way into the public eye, where global sympathy
was likely. And he has ruffled feathers for his hard-line
tactics; critics accuse him of empire building.
Hakim, the president of Inter-American
Dialogue, added: “Amorim has sometimes pushed
Brazil’s aspirations too far. He’s frank, but can
sometimes be abrasive.”
But that style ultimately clinched the WTO
deal, Amorim said. “The G20-plus changed the dynamic,”
Amorim said. “We were firm, honest and decisive
and had real leaders. Together we changed things.”
The ministry cited some estimates that said
that successful implementation of those new rules
could lift 500 million people out of poverty in poorer
nations, and add $200 billion to developing
economies.
Brokering such deals is not easy. Recently,
talks about a U.S.-driven hemisphere-wide free trade
deal, known as Free Trade of the Americas, have
stalled, largely on issues over agricultural subsidies
and intellectual property. So have efforts for a similar
deal with Europe. Now the focus is on enlarging
MERCOSUR, first with Andean and Central
American nations, and clinching trade deals with India
and South Africa.
But forging stronger ties with South Africa and
India, with which Brazil formed the G-3 grouping last
year, may be the apex of Amorim’s career. He points
to a three-way century-old chair in his office, originally
meant for courting couples and their chaperones,
where foreign ministers from the three nations first
came together in 2003.
That new alliance is already exploring ways
to harmonize efforts in their quest for more prosperity
and peace. As the largest democracies in their regions,
the three nations hold sway in global negotiations,
Amorim said, and could be a stepping stone to more
trade between those regions from which to expand
globally.
“We have affinity and influence,” he said.
Despite these achievements, Brazil is still
navigating its way through painful adjustments. A
budding economic recovery is still unfolding far too
slowly for the ranks of the unemployed. The jobless
rate has fallen from nearly 13 percent a year earlier -
but at 10.5 percent, it is still achingly high. For the
ranks of the impoverished still scrabbling for a living
in Brazil”s honeycomb of shanty towns, economic
change is not a tangible reality.
Taxes and regulations continue to stifle
564
investment and economic growth in Brazil, the world”s
fifth-largest country when measured by size and
population.
“Further steps appear to be required to
accelerate and ensure the sustainability of growth,”
the World Bank said in a report issued in November.
Yet Brazil”s economy is unmistakably stirring
after a deep sleep.
Growth reached 6.1 percent in the third
quarter from the year earlier. Some analysts have
raised their growth estimates for the year to over 4
percent from 3.5 percent earlier. In 2003, the
economy shrank by 0.2 percent. Exports this year
have also started to boom, and the country”s
November trade surplus was $2.08 billion. Tax
receipts have been rising steadily throughout the year,
allowing the government to whittle down the national
debt at a slightly quicker pace.
The decline in unemployment has helped fuel
household purchases of big-ticket items like appliances
and autos, which jumped 20 percent in September from
a year earlier. New cellphone subscribers in October
shot up 42 percent from October 2003, while retail sales
in August rose for the ninth straight month. The economy
is expected to grow at a better-than-5.3 percent clip
this year, the fastest pace since 1994, according to
government projections, and inflation has stabilized at
around 7 percent.
In a gauge of investor optimism, Brazil’s stock
market posted its biggest monthly gain in November.
The rebound in Brazil is being fueled largely by
the global economic recovery, which lifted Latin
American performance across the board. But the
government also used the favorable trade winds from
booming commodity prices to pare state costs like
pensions and shutter ministries as part of market-friendly
reform efforts many of its neighbors eschew today.
The upshot? In November the International
Monetary Fund assessed the country’s performance
as “very good.”
One of the most profitable strategies of da
Silva and Amorim to enhance growth has been their careful cultivation of ties with China. Trade between
the countries reached about $8 billion last year,
propelling China to rank as Brazil”s third-largest trade
partner after the United States and Argentina.
China has gone on a veritable spending spree in
Latin America, buying up vast quantities of raw materials
and shipping finished products back to the region for
sale. And da Silva has rolled out the red carpet.
“Annual trade with China could double to $20
billion a year,” Amorim said. “Brazil is becoming more
competitive, not just for prestige, but for practical
reasons.”
Amorim”s skills could come in handy if Brazil,
like Chile, pursues free trade with China later.
“There’s a global shortage of commodities and
MERCOSUR has them,” said John Price, president
of InfoAmericas, a market intelligence firm in Miami.
“If Brazil is smart, it will realize China needs it more
than Brazil needs China.”
