Reunião de Chefes de Delegação na OMC
Discurso do Ministro de Estado das Relações Exteriores,
Embaixador Celso Amorim, em Reunião de Chefes de
Delegação na OMC, Genebra, Suíça, 24 de julho de 2006
Thank you, Chairman, thank you, Pascal. I
also want to pay my tribute to your efforts, to your
sense of fairness, to your transparency and to the
dignity with which you conduct the work that we have
been doing for some time now, in good moments and
in bad moments - and this is indeed a bad moment.
I think that, of all the difficult moments that I
have lived in the WTO and in its predecessor GATT,
probably this is one of the saddest, precisely because
this round is not only more ambitious in terms of scope
- because the Uruguay Round was rather ambitious,
one might say -, but ambitious in terms of
development. This is the first time that the word
“development” appears in the title of a round, and
this shows that the world has a different look and a
different view of how trade negotiations should be
conducted and with what aim.
It is also sad, Pascal, because, in a way, we
were very near. We all discussed here Pascal’s
triangle and we may have had different views on who
should do what, but there was no basic conceptual
difference. We were all in the same ball park, so to
say.
It is not as in Cancun, in which some were
pressing for Singapore issues, investment and other
issues, and others were saying “No, we want to see
special treatment for LDCs”. It is not as when we
had, long ago in Brussels, the failure because, of
course, the proposals on agriculture at that time were
so far apart. And it was not like Seattle in which some
were discussing labour issues while others didn’t want
to discuss that and others wanted to discuss
environment and so on and so forth.
In this particular case we were very close and
that, of course, only augments the responsibility of
those who were entrusted by others, entrusted by
our leaders but also entrusted by the membership as
a whole to try to have a breakthrough. It is to our
discredit, we must say. And we must take that
collectively. Whoever takes the biggest fault, we must
take it collectively. We were unable to make this
breakthrough for which the membership as a whole
and, especially, as it was said here, the poorest
countries were hoping for.
We also let down our leaders, it was not only
the G8. I must say this time, it was the G8 plus five,
plus the representative of the African Union, who
worked together and who gave us our mandate. A
mandate to finish and to conclude this round and a
mandate that very clearly said that we should exert
flexibility. We heard that from practically all the leaders
that were present in that meeting.
I think seldom in world history those who
were entrusted with a mandate by leaders came back
saying that we were unable to comply with that
mandate. It makes us wonder what was really being
said by the leaders or whether there were people
listening to them. That is sad because, in a way, it is a
bad message, not only for the trade negotiations but
for the world, because if we, as negotiators, are not able to carry out the mandate that the leaders have
given us, what else should we be doing here? I mean,
should we be playing an interesting trade game in
which no major political interest is at stake? I honestly
don’t think so. So I am really disturbed. I am
personally saddened. As a country, Brazil, which is a
strong supporter of the multilateral system, will feel
the blow, as others will feel.
I have to be honest, we can all express out
commitment here and certainly I believe in the sincerity
of all those who say that they are committed, but it
will not be easy. It is fine for us to say that we should
be careful to avoid unravelling and I agree with you,
we should be careful and we should exercise utmost
caution not to lose what we have been able to
accumulate. But the risks are there.
The format of the negotiation will be put into
question, the very triangle that you have described
may be put into question and people might try to make
it a square or a pentagon or a hexagon or whatever
and, of course, you will be complicating things. The
demands of the poorest countries will be voiced and
their impatience has to be understood.
All this makes us specially concerned,
precisely because, as I have said, the differences were
not huge. We had differences in numbers but we were
talking about the same conceptual base. There was
no basic conceptual difference in our discussion, so
it was really lack of determination. I would say lack
of political will but lack of political will on whose part?
Since the leaders had said that we should exercise
flexibility, where is the political will? Is it with the
negotiators or is it with the leaders? I think it should
be with the leaders and we should implement what
they have determined us to do.
Pascal, this is a sad moment. Of course, I am
not totally devoid of hope because hope has to be
part of our nature, of our being, if we are politicians,
if we are diplomats and if we are negotiators. But I
can’t hide the fact that we are really in one of the
most difficult situations that I have seen. Some people
have said, “Well look, the Uruguay Round also had a
60
Resenha de Pol. Ext. Brasil, a. 33, n. 99, 2o semestre 2006
problem, then we came back, there was the Dunkel
text, we had one or two more years and then we
finalised.” I was here so I saw all that, but the world
was different at that time. The European Union and
the United States, with the occasional help of Japan
and Canada and some lip service to developing
countries, could come to an agreement. Rufus was
there and he probably saw that, and he is smiling.
Now the world is different, it can’t be done that way,
you have to have the developing countries onboard,
we have to have the least developing countries
onboard, we have to pay attention to their demands.
We have also to take notice of their limitations in some
cases, not all of them.
I heard, for instance, that in the question of
special products the markets in developing countries
would be closed. Certainly not in mine. I will be quite
prepared to give assurances to that effect. You know
it is very tempting in a moment like that to look for
culprits. I won’t do that. Of course, I have my analysis
and I tend to agree that probably the area in which
we were lagging behind more than others is domestic
support, internal subsidies. Maybe it was the dynamic
of the negotiation, maybe because the reaction to an
initial offer came too late. I don’t know. I can’t really
judge, but this certainly is the area which, in my
opinion, would have the power to unleash movement
on others, had we had concrete advance there.
I am not trying to hide behind other people’s
limitations. All of us would have to make concessions.
It was very comfortable for me, I didn’t have to make
any concessions and I didn’t have to say anything
that would sound like a non-concession, because we
didn’t arrive at that point. By the simple reason that
whatever happened in agriculture and was described
in detail by others simply showed that whatever you
do, when it came to NAMA, it certainly would not
help. We were prepared to do our own part
(proportionately as we have always said), but the
conditions for an agreement were just not there.
The next few months, maybe years, will be
tough and will be a difficult test for this organisation. I suppose that, as you have already said, there will
be no formal meetings, no group meeting of any kind,
no negotiating group meetings, but of course, life will
go on. I suppose Ministers will continue to meet. I
hope they will continue to be engaged. I hope they
will continue to talk about the Doha Round, not just
as a kind of interesting souvenir but as a task to be
completed.
And, of course, we need your guidance,
Pascal, in all this process. We need your guidance
because you have already proved that you are
balanced, that you are fair, and we need your guidance
because you will be the one who will be more
knowledgeable than anyone else. But we don’t want
to transfer to you the burden that is with us and we
will have to be able to tell each other how much we
were able to sacrifice in exchange of the things that
we want, but in precise terms, and how much we
want also in precise terms, not as a general idea, and
how much we will be able to sacrifice for the sake of
the multilateral system.
This “thing” - multilateral system - sometimes
just sounds like empty words but it is not. The
multilateral system now is being put to test, not only
here but in the peace and security areas as well. I
had to leave the room several times yesterday because
I had to attend to the situation of Brazilians in Lebanon.
I am sure it was not because I left the room that we
didn’t make progress because whenever I came back
we were at exactly at the same point. But this is the
reality, the multilateral system is being put to test and
the test that the WTO is being put to is a part of it,
and if we fail here it is not only a matter for us, trade
ministers, or for you, the Director-General. It is a
matter that should be of interest to everyone. I would
think that even the Secretary-General of the United
Nations should be interested, provided, of course,
that people are prepared to listen to his advice.
So, Pascal, I am sad. I am leaving Geneva
before I intended to. I don’t know when I will come
back. I don’t know if I will come back, but, in any
case, as long as I am in office, you can count on my
support for the sake of the multilateral system, for
the sake of development and for the sake of trade
that helps mainly the poorer nations.
Thank you.
