Brasil-Países Árabes


Pronunuciamento do Ministro de Estado das Relações
Exteriores, Embaixador Luis Felipe Lampreia, por ocasião
do almoço oferecido pelos Embaixadores dos Países Árabes
acreditados junto ao Governo Brasileiro, Brasília, 28 de
março de 1996


Your Excellencies, dear friends,
I just wanted to say a few words of sincere
thanks for this warm display of friendship and kindness
so very much in the Arab tradition of hospitality and
brotherhood.
I appreciate this opportunity to exchange
views with the representatives of the Arab countries
to Brazil on a friendly, informal, and open basis. This
is an occasion that was long overdue and I am grateful
to you for it.
As you all know, Brazil values and cherishes
its friendship with the Arab nations in the same way that
we value and cherish the extensive contribution that a
large Arab community has brought to our country.
We are proud of the Brazilian-Arab
community. It is a hard-working, affluent, and
influential community, fully integrated into Brazilian life,
wholeheartedly sharing our freedoms and our dreams
and strongly participating in our democratic
institutions.
As a matter of fact, Brazilian economic, social,
political and cultural life has been continuously
enriched by the intense participation of the BrazilianArab community.
Many of our most distinguished politicians,
businessmen, high-level professionals, intellectuals and
artists come from Arab descent and have proudly
kept the links with their cultural heritage.
Arabs and Brazilians of Arab descent have
helped to build this country. In fact, many of them
were responsible for bringing development and
civilization to the far reaches of our territory.
They have also taught us a lesson of tolerance
and of peaceful and constructive coexistence with
other communities of different cultural and ethnic
background and religious beliefs.
When Brazil preaches peace and
understanding among countries and nations
worldwide, it is not only because we firmly believe in
peace as a precondition for development and social
progress; nor is it only because we have now lived
for more than 125 years at continuous peace with all
our neighbors — it is also because Brazilian society owns
its very existence and development to the ethnic, religious
and cultural harmony that prevails among Brazilian
communities of very different international origins.
I insist on these aspects in order to reaffirm
that, mainly because of this sound human basis that is
irreplaceable in the relationship between sovereign
States, Brazilian-Arab relations are a priority for our
diplomacy. We have a firm and lasting ground to build
upon and we are committed to those relations.
I wanted to take this opportunity to convey
to you and to your governments this message of
confidence in the future of Brazilian-Arab relations
and to invite you to work closely with us in order to
bring creativity to the ongoing process of further
strengthening those relations. The world has changed and so has Brazil, for
the best, we hope. Our international insertion is
different now, since we have been working hard to
strengthen our credentials as a partner both at the
political and at the trade and economic levels.
Mercosul has given us a new strength and a
more powerful international identity, while more fluid
relations with our main partners both in the developing
and the developed worlds have improved our
international standing.
I sincerely believe that these trends will have
a positive influence in reshaping and strengthening our
relations with the Arab world.
A strong Brazil with stronger ties to all regions
of the world is the main our goal of our foreign policy.
The policies that we are implementing with
one region or individual partner are by no means
detrimental to the ties that we have with other regions
and partners.
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso is
personally committed to foreign affairs and
understands the importance of a balanced international
insertion for Brazil.
The Arab world stands high in our list of
priorities, just as we hope Brazil will be a priority
country in the developing world for the Arab nations.
Excellencies,
As we reflect upon the realities of the Middle
East and the Arab world in general, we realize that
the prospects for the improvement of our relations
have never been better.
A peace process is under way in the Middle
East and, despite the difficulties that are inherent to
such complex negotiations, their outlook is good.
We all knew it would not be easy. But none
should think it cannot be achieved. Nobody should
ever be allowed to imagine that there is a substitute
for peace, understanding and good will when so much
is at stake for the Arab, Palestinian and Israeli peoples
in their quest for security, development and social
progress.
Time has come for an unwavering, impartial
and unconditional support for the peace process and
for the Arab, Palestinian and Israeli leaderships that
are committed to it.
And time has come to make a resolute call
to reason to all parties that are reluctant to commit
themselves to peace or that may think that violence,
destruction, deprivation and an irrational assault on
innocent human lives could be a means to achieve
more than peace itself can do.
We strongly believe that peace must be given
a chance. Our commitment to helping the peace
process is firm. We will do it in a balanced,
harmonious way, as shown by the moves we have
been making in the region.
The Brazilian government stresses the importance
of a successful outcome for the peace process and for
all other issues connected to peace in the Middle East
because we see it as a fundamental factor in the
resurgence of the Middle East and the entire Arab world
as a dynamic region and as a promising partner for the
international community as a whole.
We are prepared to work with our Arab
partners in order to take advantage of the
unprecedented momentum that we have now in ArabBrazilian relations.
Our Foreign Ministry is undergoing a process
of restructuring so that it can better respond to the
challenges and opportunities that lay ahead of us. This
was at the core of the decision to create a Department
for African and Middle Eastern Affairs under the
direction of Minister José Vicente Pimentel, a talented
and experienced diplomat.
Again, I would like to emphasize that in no
way will any of our policies exclude or downgrade
geographic areas or substantive issues that are and
will continue to be pivotal to a foreign policy that
intends to be universal and pragmatic.
With this in mind, I would like to thank you
again for this wonderful meal and for this most
valuable opportunity for exchanging views that will
help advance our relations.
Thank you.