Reunião do Comitê de Negociações
Comerciais (TNC) da OMC
Discurso do Ministro de Estado das Relações Exteriores,
Embaixador Celso Amorim, em reunião do Comitê de
Negociações Comerciais (TNC) da OMC. Genebra,
Suíça, 1o de julho de 2006
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
I will be brief. I don’t want to go into an
evaluation of who moved and who didn’t move. I
think that would spoil the good atmosphere that you
just described. I would agree with your assessment
that we are living now in a crisis situation, but
sometimes a crisis is necessary in order to have a
good result. I think that in a way we are in the brink
of failure, but maybe this has to be brought home to
all the leaders so that they can see that the movements
have to be made in order to reach an arrangement.
The paradox of our situation, I believe Mr
Chairman, is that - and I have lived through some
successes and many failures in this organisation and
its predecessor -, but I think the paradox of this
situation, unlike for instance the one that preceded
Seattle -in Seattle of course we all knew that it was
going to fail, I mean only a miracle could have saved
it because we were very far from an agreement -, is
that an agreement is within reach. Even those among
us who have maybe some discrepancies, if each one
of us would write his or her version of the agreement
it would not be that different, I must say. Of course
there would be some thousands of tonnes here or
maybe some millions of subsidies there or maybe
some difference in coefficient but we are not in an
area in which agreement cannot be reached and, at
the same time, we are at the brink of failure.
So this is the paradox of the situation and this
is the exceptionality of the situation that requires us
to entrust you Mr Chairman, as Director-General and
Chairman of the TNC to go into intensified
consultations. I think this is what we need. Of course
part of the consultations will be with some of the Gs.
I have to remind the G6 is, in a way, an
asymmetrical body because not only of the strength
of its different parts, but also because of the mandates
that the different members have. Brazil and India are
part of the G20 and somehow carry some mandate
of the G20. We don’t have a mandate from other
groups. There is a certain asymmetry in the way the
three corners of the triangle can be resolved, but
anyway it is one of the important elements of your
consultation. But I am sure that there will be many
others you will have to consult on things like quota-
free duty-free, which are beyond what we can do in
the G6.
I want to stress that your role as a facilitator
now is crucial and for a very simple reason. Many
people have said when they came here that they had
cards in their pockets or they were prepared to
negotiate, but of course they are not prepared to show
each other the cards that they have in their pockets.
But they may be more prepared to show them to you or at least give you some hint of what cards they have
and, in this process, you may be able to enlighten us
on what is the kind of possible agreement that direct
contact sometimes doesn’t allow.
Without departing from a bottom-up
approach, from a Member-driven approach, I think
there is room and actually there is the necessity at
this stage of a greater involvement, of more
proactiveness of the Director-General. That is
essentially what I had to say. I just want to mention
because I think maybe some people in this room may
26
Resenha de Pol. Ext. Brasil, a. 33, n. 99, 2o semestre 2006
have missed but this morning there was a joint
statement which involved a large number of groups
from developing countries and the G20, the G33, the
ACP, the LDCs, the African Group, the small
vulnerable economies, the NAMA 11, the Cotton 4,
and the CARICOM. That joint statement which of
course reaffirms some of our position ends with a
reaffirmation of our commitment to a successful
completion of the Round by the end of this year.
Thank you.
