
BRAZIL’S FOREIGN MINISTER ON
JAPAN: 110 YEARS AND BEYOND
(THE ASAHI SHIMBUN, 23/7/2018)
[INGLÊS]
On my recent trip to Asia, I had the
pleasure of visiting Tokyo on May 17
and 18 to strengthen the global and
strategic partnership between Brazil and
Japan.
Our countries share common values
regarding democracy, the rule of law, human rights, multilateralism and
sustainable development. My
conclusions from the fruitful
consultations I held with Japanese
ministers and business leaders over
these two days can be summarized in
one short message: there is an ocean of
opportunities still untapped.
Japan is Brazil’s most traditional
partner in Asia. Since the arrival 110
years ago of the first ship with Japanese
immigrants, the “Kasato Maru”,
generations of immigrants and their
descendants have contributed to our
country's growth.
Today, the world's largest Nikkei
community lives in Brazil, and nearly
200,000 Japanese descendants have
chosen Japan as their home. We are
extremely honored to receive Princess
Mako in Brazil for the celebrations of
our human bonds.
Our historical relationship has produced
important accomplishments in many
key areas. Japan's cooperation to
increase agricultural productivity in the
Brazilian Cerrado contributed to
positioning Brazil as a global leader in
food exports. Bilateral flows of trade
and investment demonstrate that Japan
found in Brazil its main economic
partner in South America. I believe,
however, there is room to expand our
partnership much further.
After two years of recession in 2015
and 2016, Brazil grew 1 percent in
2017. Prospects for 2018 estimate
growth of 2.6 percent. (The projection
was later revised down to 1.6 percent.)
President Temer's agenda for economic
reform has led Brazil back to the track
of sustained growth. As our economic
recovery consolidates, Brazil has
regained its attractiveness to investors. A report recently released by Ernst &
Young indicates that our country now
ranks second in the best destinations for
investment. The positive prospects of
the Brazilian economy reinforce trade
and investment opportunities that can be
channeled through bilateral
coordination mechanisms our two
governments put in place.
During President Temer's visit to Tokyo
in 2016, Brazil and Japan signed a
memorandum of cooperation for the
promotion of investments in
infrastructure aiming at ensuring the
best possible environment for Japanese
investments. Under the memorandum,
both countries are working to scale up
opportunities on key sectors such as
water and sanitation, railways,
information and communication
technologies and energy.
Brazil and Japan also share the view
that trade liberalization, rather than
protectionism, is the best answer to
encourage a more predictable
environment for business, job creation,
investments and technology innovation.
As a Mercosur member, Brazil is
engaged in negotiations to conclude
important agreements with the
European Union, Canada, the European
Free Trade Association (EFTA), India,
and others.
As of 2019, thanks to the network of
bilateral agreements in which Mercosur
participates, South America will
become a de facto free trade area for
goods. On May 25, I participated with
my Mercosur foreign minister
colleagues in the launch negotiations for
a free trade agreement with South
Korea. Brazil would warmly welcome
Japan in an economic partnership with
Mercosur. Our human, political and economic
bonds have transcended geography and
history, and promise to pave the way for
a future of even closer collaboration. I
thank the government and the people of
Japan for building together with Brazil
the roads that will mutually benefit our
societies
