“Seminário Brazil Today”


Pronunciamento do Ministro de Estado das Relações
Exteriores, Embaixador Luiz Felipe Lampreia, por ocasião
do Semínario “Brasil Today”, sobre o tema “Brazilian
Initiatives on Economic Integration”. Nova York, 17 de
janeiro de 1996


1- Experience in integration
To fully grasp the importance and the
dimension of economic integration for the Brazilian
government one must bear in mind that the efforts
toward integration in Latin-America accrue decades
of experience in the pursuit of goals that in the past,
often proved to be either too ambitious. or simply
untimely. Actually, these two ingredients - realism and
timing - are key elements in Brazil’s present equation
for economic and trade linkages with its global
partners.
2.The history of Latin-American integration
efforts shows that realism and timing were not always
present when quite praiseworthy objectives were
outlined and deadlines set. Such was the case of the
1960 Montevideo Treaty. which created the Latin-American Free Trade Association (LAFTA) and
established that integration should be achieved through
product by product negotiations simultaneously
involving all parties of the Association. The rigidity of
this process completely doomed the LAFTA’s
chances for success.
3. The Montevideo Treaty of 1980 created
the Latin-American Integration Association (LAIA).
successor to LAFTA, which now allowed for the
negotiations of bilateral or limited multilateral
agreements among members of the Association,
designated “Partial Scope Agreements”. Concessions
or preferences agreed upon were then applicable only
to the signing parties of these partial agreements and
not, as was the case with LAFTA, to all members of
the Association. Even after these new provisions,
progress was still slow in the direction of a truly subcontinental free trade area. further still from a common
market, final goal of LAIA, as stated in its very 1st
Article. Not all countries were prepared to open their
borders to competitive neighbors, and most had their
views of foreign trade directed to extra-regional
markets. This legal framework, nevertheless, paved
the way to the open markets thrust which gained force
in the late 80s.
4. By the middle of the past decade, the import
substitution model was running out of steam
throughout Latin-America and the return to
democracy made old rivalries obsolete. Brazil and
Argentina were both returning to democracy and
undergoing the first stages of a progressive opening
of their two somewhat complementary economies.
In 1986 the two started talks that resulted in the
bilateral Economic Integration and Cooperation
Program, which envisaged the creation of a common
economic area to be achieved by a gradual and
selective opening of both markets. Several bilateral
agreements and protocols were signed until. In 1990,
all these instruments were consolidated and included
in the Brazil-Argentina Economic Complementary Agreement No.14 of LAIA, which was the seed of
MERCOSUL.
5. In that same year. Paraguay and Uruguay
- countries with economic and political interests highly
intermeshed with those of Brazil and Argentina - were
invited to participate in the process which culminated
in the creation of MERCOSUL with the signature of
the Asuncion Treaty in March 1991.
II- Mercosul: an unprecedented initiative
6.It is important to underline that since its
origin MERCOSUL was meant to be much more than
a mere free trade area. The Asuncion Treaty envisages
the formation of an enlarged economic space with a
unified imports tariff, free circulation of goods and
means of production (capital and labor), coordination
of economic and trade policies, and joint action on
the contacts with our trade partners.
7. MERCOSUL was an innovation on several
different aspects with respect to previous integration
efforts carried out in the continent. Maybe the most
remarkable distinction was the program of automatic
and progressive reduction of tariff duties among the
four members during the 4 year transition period”.
Many wrongly believed the “zero tariffs”
objective to be far-fetched and impossible to reach.
It is true that a few exceptions remain, but they are
few, they are exceptions. and they are scheduled to
disappear over the next few years.
8.Together with the elimination of tariffs
applicable to commerce among the four members,
non-tariff barriers to trade (such as quotas.
phytosanitary restrictions and others) were mostly
eliminated. With these goals accomplished. the
skeptics now began to doubt the attainment of the
Customs Union, which was finally put into effect, right
on schedule, on January 1st 1995, also under the
legal framework of LAIA.
9. Last December, in Punta del Este.
Uruguay, MERCOSUL approved an “Action
Program” that outlines the objectives to be attained
by the year 2000. One of the main concerns of the
MERCOSUL 2000 Program is the removal of all
remaining tariffs for trade inside the Customs Union
borders. Enduring nontariff barriers or similar
dispositions should also be completely eliminated or,
in some cases, harmonized.
10. The straightening and deepening of the
integration process in other trade related areas are
also a high priority of the Action Plan. On the path
for the ultimate goal of MERCOSUL – the Common
Market - several areas will be addressed and new
objectives set out, all to be pursued under the
principles of gradualism. flexibility and equilibrium.
Conversations will be carried out on agriculture,
industry, mining, energy, services, communications,
transports and infrastructure, tourism, financial
matters, taxation, and macroeconomic policies. In all
areas, the four countries will examine ways to further
cooperation, development and harmonization of the
various national mechanisms. rules and regulations.
III- The positive impact of Mercosul
11. With MERCOSUL, for the first time ever,
the Brazilian society as a whole felt the full impact of
integrating measures in all areas and activities of
everyday life. It is in production and marketing
however that the changes are most evident. A quick
look at supermarket shelves and store windows will
show a vastly different array of goods from the one
displayed just a few years ago.
12. Some segments of the economy
underwent widespread and deep transformations. The
automobile industry is a patent example of this
inflection. Before the 90s, the national plants
produced obsolete models that. with few and notable
exceptions, had been taken out of the market of the
industrialized countries decades earlier. Modern
technologies, such as the electronic fuel injection
system could not be incorporated to the production
lines due to extremely high import taxes or market
protection in other areas - informatics in this case.
13. The effects of lower taxes and reduced
market protection were manifold. It made the industry face the competition of modern imported car models
and allowed the reequipment and updating of the
assembly lines. The Brazilian market is now supplied
with automobiles similar to those sold in the US, Japan
or Europe. The market was also stimulated and
growth resumed. Present production level is over 1.5
million units/year. Some projections indicate that, by
the year 2000, Brazil could become the 5th largest
automobile producer in the world.
14. The Brazilian informatics sector is also a
paradigm of the changes induced by MERCOSUL
and the shift to a more open market environment.
This industry was protected, for several years, with a
closed borders policy. Today. innovations are
unmistakably noticeable. Associations and creative
partnerships with foreign companies are numerous.
Prices to the consumer have fallen drastically and up
to date technologies are now available at much more
competitive prices.
15. Maybe the most remarkable feature of
this new scenario is the emergence of a new mentality
amid the MERCOSUL entrepreneurs. One that
encourages a competitive approach, stricter quality
control, research and development of new
technologies, productivity increases. labor and
business specialization, and the search for new
partnerships - internally and with foreign companies.
IV- Mercosul: A building block
16. Greatly stimulated by the positive effects
of the integration process within the borders of the
Customs Union, MERCOSUL is holding fast to the
larger goal of competitively inserting the sub-region
in the international markets. It is by no accident that
the principles and provisions of the Asuncion Treaty
are thoroughly compatible with Article 24 of the CATT
and also with the Marrakech Agreement establishing
the World Trade Organization.
17. This fact has been ascertained throughout
the consultations with the WTO Working Group
specifically established for MERCOSUL. These
attributes result from the firm determination of the
negotiating teams to give MERCOSUL a transparent
and non-excluding character. accordant to the true
and intended meaning of the term “open regionalism”.
18. The four MERCOSUL members have in
mind the importance of the adaptation of their
economic structures to the highly competitive world
environment. With this in mind. a whole section of
the Punta del Este Action Program was dedicated to
the external relations of MERCOSUL.
19. The emphasis placed by the four
governments on the “open regionalism” trait of the
group should be stressed, for it is one of the major
cornerstones of the MERCOSUL initiative. The four
member countries view their association not as an
end in itself, but as a means to bring the region closer
to the objectives of the LAIA. In fact. Article 3 of the
1980 Treaty of Montevideo enshrines the
“convergence” principle and calls for a “progressive
multilateralization of the Partial Agreements” with a
view to the “establishment of the Latin-American
common market”. In this same line, the Asuncion
Treaty states that MERCOSUL should be considered
a step forward in the direction of the integration of
Latin America and its Article 20 leaves the group open
for the accession of other LAIA members.
20. The open nature of MERCOSUL may
be also ascertained by numbers. Although total trade
among the MERCOSUL members increased by 302%
from 1988 to 1994, there was no trade diversion.
Actually, extra-regional trade exchanges increased by
83% in the same period. MERCOSUL’s share of world
trade also jumped from 6,5% to 19,5%.
21. As pointed out earlier the four
MERCOSUL governments understand that the
enlarged market of the Customs Union has the crucial
purpose of exposing the national enterprises to foreign
competition, notably in the economic sectors that have
been under high levels of protection for a long period
of time. This should be an incremental process,
cautiously controlled, in order to ensure adaptation
and restructuring, and not unnecessary insolvency due
to a hasty and disorderly changing of the economic environment.
22. One should notice that, especially in the
case of Brazil, the national companies were doubly
exposed to foreign competition. On one hand there
was the gradual but quick exposure to the products
of the other three partners. On the other hand. the
unified tariff lowered the protection of several
industries, in some cases rather significantly. The
average unified tariff is calculated to be around 12%,
consequently beneath the previous Brazilian 14%
average, and much lower than the high level of
protection present in the 80s.
V - Mercosul reaching out
23. The next obvious and natural step for
MERCOSUL on the external front was to further
integrate its market with those of the neighbor
countries also covered by the Montevideo Treaty.
The construction of a net of free trade agreements
with other LAIA countries is in the making.
Negotiations have a 4+1 format - or 4 + block as in
the case of the conversations with the Andean Group.
At this first stage, these agreements strive to give a
multilateral framework to all concessions that were
individually negotiated by the four MERCOSUL
countries with the remaining LAIA members. Last
month, an agreement with Bolivia was concluded.
Negotiations are quite advanced with Chile and
significant progress was also achieved with Venezuela.
24. The next stage is to establish, for each of
these agreements, a mechanism similar to the one used
by MERCOSUL during its “transition period”: a
program of gradual and automatic tariffs elimination
scheduled to take place over a period of 10 years. In
order to be successful, all these efforts strictly observe
the two principles I mentioned in the beginning of these
remarks -timing and flexibility.
VI- The free trade area of the americas
25. It Is Brazil’s unfaltering conviction that
these two parameters should guide our endeavors to
bring about the most challenging task of our continent
which is the construction of the Free Trade Area of
the Americas - FTAA - by the year 2005. In
December of 1994, the Miami Summit, which
congregated leaders of 34 countries of our continent,
adopted a Declaration of Principles and an Action
Plan, which seal a pact for the attainment of
“development and prosperity through economic
integration and free trade.
26. We believe that the experience LatinAmerican countries have had with their successive
regional integration attempts will play a major role
during the debates and negotiations concerning the
FTAA. As I noted earlier, implausible goals and
deadlines were conducive to repeated failures. That
is why our delegations at the Miami Summit, and at
the Ministerial Meeting, last July, in Denver, took
distinctive care in stating that we should use the
existing agreements in the region as the foundations
of the FTAA. MERCOSUL in particular could offer
substantial contributions, due to its large experience
accumulated not only with the negotiations among
the four members. but also with the above mentioned
4+1 talks with the other LAIA members.
27. Brazil firmly believes that this “building
blocks” approach, while fostering a gradual
convergence of the existing regional agreements -
extraordinary assets themselves - will help us avoid
the traps of unrealistic timing and objectives. During
the FTAA negotiations, the Latin-American countries
have stressed the importance of measuring every step
of the way and avoiding unrealistic or unbalanced
commitments.
28. To this effect, the working groups created
by the Denver trade ministerial have been instructed
to gather all possible information on previous
experiences and the existing integration mechanisms.
Brazil is actively participating in all working
groups and strongly hopes that their reports will allow
the ministers gathered in Cartagena, next March, to
make further progress and establish appropriate
guidelines to our negotiating teams.
VII- Integration and development
29. A common trace of Brazil’s various
initiatives listed above is the ultimate goal of
development and betterment of conditions for the
peoples of all parties. Free trade and integration are
subordinated to that higher purpose. The first
considerandum of the Asuncion Treaty clearly reads:
“the expansion of our countries domestic markets,
through integration, is a vital prerequisite for
accelerating their process of economic development
with social justice”. The same principle is present, in
similar words, at the Montevideo Treaty and in the
Declaration of Principles of the Miami Summit.
30. It is to warrant the fulfillment of this goal
that Brazil has shown uncompromising steadfastness
in one aspect of the negotiations: equilibrium. All
ingredients and variables present during the
conversations should serve the sole purpose of
ensuring that all signatory parties benefit from the
agreement.
Balance must not be sacrificed for the benefit
of immediate political or economic gains. Should this
happen, the inevitable consequence is the signing of
an agreement doomed to be short lived or
inoperative. In either case, the parties will be quite
reluctant before they make the decision to commit
time and valuable resources on similar efforts.
31. Brazil believes that the political and
economic conditions in the Americas are ripe for a
sure-footed and unwavering course towards the
restructuring of our economies through a higher level
of economic linkage in the continent. The road of
economic integration should be used with
resourcefulness and prudence to avoid the mistakes
of the past. New challenges, opportunities, and
responsibilities lie ahead and our partners from the
Americas may rest assured that Brazil will not refrain
from them.
