“THE RIGHT TO FOOD”
(JORNAL “THE NEWS” DO PAQUISTÃO, 02/12/2012)
(original em inglês)
The issue of food and nutritional security
must be faced squarely, given the urgency
of the problem. Hundreds of millions of our
fellow human beings - perhaps even more
than a billion - are suffering from hunger and
malnutrition, their lives marred by the denial
of what is universally recognised as a basic
human right: the right to adequate food.
Brazil has vast experience with the question
of food and nutritional security. For a long
time, we have lived through the paradox of
being a nation with extraordinary agricultural
resources and yet with millions of people
facing hunger and malnutrition.
Fortunately, Brazil is now reaping
signifcant results from a concerted effort to
reduce poverty and eradicate hunger. Over the
last several years, we have made important
progress, as almost 40 million people were
lifted out of poverty since 2003, with a major
reduction in socioeconomic inequality.
Brazil still has a long way to go. But it is
moving forward rapidly.
President Dilma Rousseff has made putting
an end to extreme poverty a main priority for
the Brazilian government. The initiative she
launched in 2011 - “Brazil without Extreme
Poverty” - seeks to provide a minimal income
to those Brazilians who still face a situation of
serious vulnerability.
The problem of food security is also
increasingly a part of Brazil’s foreign policy
agenda. There is no development worthy of
the name if it does not include social justice
and food security, and not just for a single
country, but for all people in all countries.
We know that sustainability is the key word.
In that sense, the Rio+20 Conference was a
turning point. Concern over food security was
a central issue in the debates and deliberations
in Rio de Janeiro.
In Rio, UN Secretary-General Ban Kimoon launched what he called the “Zero
Hunger Challenge”, with fve fundamental
goals: universal access to food, reduction
of child malnutrition, the doubling of the
productivity of micro-producers, promotion
of sustainable food chains, and, lastly, the
reduction of waste.
The trade-related aspects of food security
are also of the utmost importance for Brazil
and for many other developing countries. That
is why the Rio+20 document underscored
the role of international trade, on the basis of a universal, rules-based, open, nondiscriminatory and equitable multilateral
trading system, and included trade-distorting
subsidies in the list of issues that must be
addressed.
In Brazil’s view, it is crucial to consider
food and nutritional security together with
agricultural trade issues. Protectionism in
developed countries has been threatening food
security in developing countries, as it hinders
agricultural production and discourages
investment in the rural sector. Moreover, it
is extremely detrimental to the development
of global trade chains involving agricultural
goods, which could contribute to increasing
world food and nutritional security.
Brazil also exemplifes the fact that
sustainable food and nutritional security is
inconceivable without signifcant progress
in agricultural productivity. The Brazilian
Agricultural Research Corporation
(EMBRAPA) continues to make a signifcant
contribution to this effort, not only in Brazil,
but also more and more in cooperation with
other countries.
Another point is the central role of what
we in Brazil call “family agriculture” -
the smallholder farmers. The Brazilian
government has been implementing a strong
program to support small and poor farmers
by ensuring them access to credit, technical
assistance, crop insurance and marketing
options, including through government
purchases. The emphasis on this kind of
agriculture is one of the drivers of the “More
Food for Africa” project, which Brazil is
carrying out with African countries.
In Africa, alongside the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, Brazil is
also developing the “Purchase from Africans
for Africa” program, by which the produce
from household agriculture is bought for
school feeding programs through the World
Food Program, thus creating a virtuous circle
of better nutrition, better learning and local
development.
We have been sharing these and other
experiences of virtuous circles with our
partners in Latin America through regional
meetings such as the Specialized Meeting
on Household Agriculture of the Southern
Common Market (MERCOSUL), which
allows us to share our best practices in regards
to sustainable food production and nutritional
security.
Finally, we must stress the importance
of enhancing food security in the context of
the serious threats posed by climate change.
Adaptation to climate change is a priority,
particularly for developing countries, and a
major part of adaptation refers to ensuring
conditions for agricultural production at a
level that ensures food security.
We must continue enhancing social
protection and access to food. This will
increase demand while making it urgent to
increase production. So we must continue,
at the same time, to work on agricultural
research to enhance productivity, as well
as on investment and on the strengthening
of smallholder agriculture. We must also
effectively tackle the problem of rich-country
subsidies, which distort trade and threaten
the development of agriculture in poorer
countries.
In the words of the Brazilian scholar Josué
de Castro, we will not have peace if half of
the population does not sleep because they are
hungry and the other half stays awake out of
fear of those who have nothing to eat. Peace
will be attained only when we ensure that the
right to food is a human right that has to be
protected, promoted and provided everywhere
and for everyone.