Entrevista concedida pelo Ministro das
Relações Exteriores, Embaixador Celso
Amorim, ao jornal “Financial Times” (22 de
fevereiro de 2007)
Jonathan Wheatley, the FT’s Brazil
correspondent, and Richard Lapper, the FT’s Latin
America editor, recently spoke with Celso
Amorim, Brazil’s Foreign Minister. Mr Wheatley
also interviewed Dilma Rousseff, the President’s
Chief of Staff, and Mr Lapper talked with Guido
Mantega, Brazil’s Finance Minister.
FINANCIAL TIMES: What changes are
taking place in relations in South America?
Mercosur today seems much less cohesive that in
the past and there seems to be a new axis
developing from Argentina through Brazil and
Bolivia to Venezuela.
CELSO AMORIM: I don’t know how
cohesive Mercosur was before. If relations are
superficial it can give the impression you are
cohesive, but as relations deepen some differences
may appear. The kind of unhappiness now being
shown by Uruguay first appeared during the
previous administration in Brazil. Take the
agreement with Mexico, in which in reality there
was a kind of authority for each country to go its
own way, which in practice was against the
customs union. Of course Mexico is a member of
Aladi, so in a way it may be easier in the long run
to seek convergence. It’s certainly more difficult
if any member seeks to have a free trade agreement
with any major commercial power. It’s not a
question of the US, it might be the US, the EU or
China, but if a member state has an FTA with a
major trading partner which departs from the TEC
[Mercosur’s common external tariff] then of
course there is a problem. Uruguay did this with
Mexico at that time and it was a problem. So did
we, but under the Aladi umbrella.
So these kinds of difficulties have appeared
before. Lula is the first to admit it, but this is not
something that happened in this government, it
has been happening for a long time. We are the
first to admit that Mercosur hasn’t fulfilled its
promise to the smaller economies.
To put it simply, their exports to Brazil
didn’t increase. Actually they decreased in the past
eight years or so – very abruptly after the
devaluation under [former Brazilian President]
Fernando Henrique Cardoso [in 1999] and never
picked up to their previous level.
FT: You recently mentioned a Uruguayan
manufacturer of mineral water that was finding it
difficult to export to Brazil...
MR AMORIM: In one of our first
Mercosur ministerial summits, in 2003, the second
actually, the question of asymmetry was put very
strongly by them, and we did absolutely everything
that was asked of us. But it was not enough for
them to attract investment. Maybe for different
reasons. One reason is technical barriers,
bureaucratic barriers of different kinds. We’re not
denying it, it may be true in some cases, sometimes
for well-intentioned reasons I must say.
But even allowing them some preferential
treatment in terms of exceptions to the TEC, so
that they can buy inputs at lower prices – that was
not enough. In any economy you also have
externalities, so somebody who wants to invest
in Uruguay or in São Paulo must look at where
they can import capital goods more cheaply. But
there are other factors, too.
But it took time to reach the conclusion
that this was not enough. So in my opinion it
required some kind of affirmative action. This is
not because we are or want to be a very generous
partner, it’s not a matter of favours. It’s in the
interests of Mercosur. Mercosur has given a new
personality to the region that it didn’t have before,
so this is in our interest. That’s why we are trying
to interest our development bank, the BNDES, to
reach agreements on investment. But all this is
starting now. And we are acting on other fronts
such as in the case of the mineral water, but it’s
not only that.We are financing investment, joint
ventures. Of course if a Brazilian company is involved that makes it easier but it doesn’t have
to be a 100 per cent Brazilian investment.
So there is a much clearer consciousness
on the part of the Brazilian government that we
need to do more. It’s not enough that the president
is an integrationist or that the foreign minister is,
you have to have customs officers and police at
the border who are integrationists too. They have
to do their jobs with a different kind of mindset.
All these instruments of protection were created
at a different moment, not when Brazil was trying
to aim at broader integration.
Recently we had the launch of the PAC
[the government’s programme to accelerate
economic growth] and as far as I can remember
this is the first time that there has been a
programme in Brazil with a list of criteria for
selecting projects in infrastructure, where South
American integration is mentioned as a factor. So
this view, this consciousness that we have to
somehow include the idea of integration in our
internal policies is finally happening. It takes time
and it is not easy. But for example, the bilateral
commissions on trade are led by the trade
ministers and have been very successful. So there
is a change in mentality, not only by the foreign
minister but by others too. More broadly, we are
now making a contribution of $200m to the CAF
development bank, so we are getting more and
more involved in the integration process.
FT: Can you rule out that Uruguay might
go its own way?
MR AMORIM: I can’t say that. It’s their
choice of course. Every Brazilian would respect
that. But you can’t have your cake and eat it. You
can’t be part of Mercosur and at same time not be
part of the customs union. It is one thing is to have
exceptions for a transition period. Brazil has
exceptions, we had them for a long time, I believe
they are still there for pharmaceutical goods, which
don’t pay the full TEC. Argentina has exceptions on
capital goods, Uruguay and Paraguay have more.
I’m not saying this is ideal. In reality the TEC is like
536
virtue, it is its own reward, because to have a TEC
you have to get rid of bureaucrats and have a real
common market working.
FT: The Uruguayans might argue that if
Mercosur can adapt to allow in Venezuela and
Bolivia, shouldn’t it also adapt in favour of its
original members?
MR AMORIM: In the case of Venezuela,
speaking broadly, not product by product,
Venezuela had agreements with Colombia for
example, and some of these will involve zero
tariffs, which is different from the TEC. That’s
not a problem because we also have an agreement
with the Andean countries. So a convergence is
possible. The difficulty would be if Venezuela had
an FTA with the US, the EU or Japan, as then it
couldn’t change, it becomes an international
obligation. If for example Bolivia needs a cost of
living exception as it needs to buy something more
cheaply – if it needs that as a transition, OK, but if
they negotiate that with the EU it can’t change, ever.
I agree that Mercosur should adapt to
improve conditions. When we made our
agreement with the Andean countries – and for
Brazil, South America is now more important that
the US as an export market, and imports are
increasing too – all the advantages or exceptions
that we offered to Ecuador were automatically
extended to Uruguay and Paraguay. So I don’t see
these problems happening. Of course you have to
take into account that Bolivia is much poorer than
Uruguay. And we don’t have the money that the
EU has to compensate everyone for the common
agricultural policy and so on. We don’t have those
funds. So we have to give exceptions here and
there. But one thing is to do this as a transition,
the other is for a country to be involved in
negotiations that would make that immutable.
We don’t have the funds, but we do
recognise the need to correct asymmetries and we
have already spent $70m on projects in Uruguay
and Paraguay, which is a form of compensation.
I’m not saying it solves all the problems but it puts us in the right direction.
FT: Why is it so important for
Venezuela and Bolivia to join Mercosur?
MR AMORIM: If you look at
Mercosur from a purely commercial angle you
won’t understandit, and it would probably not
justify itself fully. When talks about Mercosur
started, people said Why are you talking to
Argentina, you should be talking to the US. Of
course, now trade in Mercosur is very important,
it has gone from $4bn to nearly $30bn, so it is not
negligible. But you can’t look at it from that point
of view alone. Also, the EU is not purely commercial,
or it would never have gone beyond free trade, it
would never have become a customs union.
Of course the two countries you
mentioned, especially Venezuela, have huge
energy resources. And in the case of Venezuela it
gives us an opening to the Caribbean, which is
very important geopolitically – not because we
want political influence but because it is part of
our trade routes.
Bolivia has the largest border with Brazil,
so for us it is very important that things go well
there. In recent years it has always been in crisis
and though I’m not saying the crisis can be solved
there is always a chance. The government
represents a part of the population that has always
been repressed. And in Bolivia we are in
discussions on the border region, on the joint use
of river resources that are important to us, plus
the connection to the Pacific, so it is absolutely
essential for Brazil that things are stable in Bolivia.
FT: Is open regionalism still there, driven
by trade, or is the emphasis now more on
resources?
MR AMORIM: I don’t disagree with that
analysis [that resources are more important than
trade]. There have been many changes and I quite
agree that the emphasis on resources and
interconnectivity is much greater now. But the
purpose at the start of Mercosur was mainly
political, to consolidate democracy. At the time
we were in a new era of liberalism. As a negotiator,
as I was at the time, I was seeing two countries
aligning very quickly, Argentina and Brazil, and
that’s what happened, and it was good. Maybe
there has been a change of emphasis, but...
The world at large was going through
unilateralism, the Uruguay round, maybe the
perception was that this was the main thing, but I
never thought it was the main thing, the main thing
was political unity in the region. But of course
trade is absolutely necessary. That’s why
sometimes we disagree, we have discussions with
Chávez and others, because they think they can
belittle trade, and although I think trade is not the
ultimate goal, it is an essential means.
FT: What is the main thing now?
MR AMORIM: Trade continues to be
important. For Bolivia it will be much easier to
get compensation in Mercosur for what they are
losing in the US because the Andean trade
preference act will not be renewed. People say,
Aren’t you afraid Venezuela will become an
autarchy? Well, it’s not to us as we exported
$600m in 2003 and almost $3.6bn last year, so
trade is there and is increasing at a rhythm not
common in the world, except for China.It’s not
an autarchy, it’s buying from us and not from the
US or the EU, which is not our problem. People
talk a lot about the state but 90 per cent of life in
Venezuela is governed by private activities.
FT: Is there a new ideological alignment
in the region led by Brazil, Venezuela and Bolivia?
MR AMORIM: Did you hear Lula’s
speech the other day? We are not interested in
growth if it is not accompanied by democracy or
social justice. If you call that ideology, fine.
Ideology has become a dirty word. Nowadays it
is only identified with the left. If ideology is having
growth with democracy and social justice, I’m fine
with that. I’m not denying that we have affinities
with some people that may help, although in the
area of social reform they may not have the same
identical way of seeing the political process. I don’t need to go into details, you can see if you
followed the elections in Brazil, how much Lula
was attacked in the press and how he didn’t move
one finger to prevent it.
But we have excellent relations with
Colombia and Chile, where our investment is also
growing. Chile is a very open economy, and
Colombia has an agreement with the US.
Sometimes people say Uribe is a conservative, but
we have excellent relations. And Colombia was
essential in the deal between Aladi and Mercosur
that enables us to talk about the South American
Community of Nations based on the reality of free
trade. We now have a free trade area covering the
whole of South America. And it enables us to talk
about infrastructure, although these things may
not be as advanced as we would like.
The only thing about free trade in South
America is that it’s not multilateral. But we have
free trade agreements between all the groups, so
in practice all the groups are linked. One of the
ideas is to have convergence and in practice this
is already having results. And there have been a
lot of advances in physical connectivity. We are
starting in a very pragmatic way. The agreement
with Venezuela for example is not the big gas
pipeline for all of South America which may come
one day and we think it should, but a very precise
pipeline from Venezuela to north-eastern Brazil.
And we have an agreement on exploration of oil
and gas in Venezuela. This is separate from the
agreement no a refinery in the northeast.
FT: Does building the refinery get you
access to the Orinoco fields?
MR AMORIM: Yes, the refinery is linked
to the oil fields and the pipeline is something
different, but in a way everything combines in an
energy agreement. Not only this, our trade with
Venezuela is extraordinarily high, of all kinds.
There are many foodstuffs, capital goods,
machinery – it’s very varied.
We have agreements like this with Bolivia,
with Chile, with Ecuador, with Colombia, and
538
with Argentina. It’s hard to find somewhere we
don’t have an agreement with. One of the most
important projects put into operation was the
interconnection between the Peruvian Pacific and
the border with Brazil. This is very important for
development. Last year for the first time the state
of Acre exported more to Peru than to the east,
even before the road is ready. The connection
between the North Atlantic and the Pacific took
place in the 19th century. We are a hundred years
behind but we have to catch up.
The world of the 21st century is a world
governed by big blocks. China is a block in itself,
the EU became a block. But even a country as big
as Brazil is not a block that can face these real
giants, so integration of South America is
important for Brazil but it’s even more vital for
the other countries in South America as otherwise
they won’t even be noticed. So of course
somebody can come and reach a trade agreement
with the small countries if they want to annoy us
or create a problem for Mercosur.
FT: So are energy resources your big
priority?
MR AMORIM: Certainly the most
obvious single thing is resources and energy in
particular, but I would not underestimate trade and
I would not underestimate stability. Why did the
EU incorporate Bulgaria or Rumania or the Czech
republic, is it because they are big markets or
because of stability in the region? If the region is
unstable that will have a big impact on us.
We have to make the best of liberalisation
and make sure it is happening more quickly and
deeply here than in relation to the rest of the world.
The first time the four countries were together was
not to discuss their own integration but to
coordinate policy for the Initiative of the Americas
by president Bush senior.
Liberalisation is certainly a big priority in
world trade and that is why we are so interested
in finalising the WTO. And don’t get me wrong,
we give big priority to that. There are nuances between the different countries and all kinds of
investment are welcome. The participation of
private investment is very important and the
government is trying to invest in areas where the
private sector is less interested. There is no attempt
to get the Brazilian state involved in
manufacturing, there is no going back in that
respect. So there are nuances, this is not
generalised. On the other hand there are areas
where without the inducement of the state, nothing
will happen. I mentioned infrastructure. In 200
years, nobody has decided to build a railway
between Rio and Chile or Peru.
Brazil and even Argentina for that matter
may have taken measures that are seen as
protectionist, but I would hesitate because any
simplified analysis in that direction might give
the idea that we want to go back to the time of the
big state company. This is not the case. We have
CVRD growing as a big private company,
Petrobras is influenced a lot by its private stock
holders.
FT: Yet the companies that benefit from
regional integration are primarily big companies
in resources and construction.
MR AMORIM: But take AmBev, which
produces beer. It is present in every country in
South America except Suriname and Guiana.
Textiles companies are investing in Peru to sell to
the US. Of course it’s proportional and the big
companies may be more involved, but I would
need a detailed analysis of our exports.
FT: How much concern is there over
the clear drive in Venezuela to go towards a more
centralised, more executive-driven model with
fewer checks and balances?
MR AMORIM: It’s certainly not our
way, for many historic reasons. We follow
Churchill’s model that democracy is flawed but
is the best regime yet invented. And our model is
certainly to have checks and balances and a free
press, which I think we have proven.
Don’t ask me to be very specific. I can say
we value freedom of the press and of criticism
very much. We prefer it that way, for us, and we
prefer others to follow the same route, but I can’t
go into legal specifics. Whether we would make
the same statements is something different. During
the process of the referendum all the decisions
were taken by the Venezuelan government and
people, but whenever we can use our positive
influence in situations like that, we do. Which
doesn’t mean it’s always effective. And the
Venezuelan opposition has made huge mistakes
in the past.
FT: Is there concern at what might happen
in Venezuela if the price of oil fell?
MR AMORIM: Even if that happens it
won’t be immediate. President Chávez is aware
that they can’t live only on oil revenues, they have
to diversify their production and some of the things
that they discuss with us to do with agriculture
and industrial production, even some of their
concerns about the timetable of Mercosur, show
they are aware of this. I think he is concerned.
Things are not easy anywhere, and of
course if we were to take the kind of line that other
countries have taken in the past, of trying to
influence the results of elections, that doesn’t
work, in fact it backfires. Sowhat we can do is try
to help in the dialogue in Venezuela between the
government and the opposition. I talk a lot to
Chávez but I also receive people from the
Venezuelan opposition here. And if we can help
in any other situation, like the one in Bolivia...
But all these things are very delicate. The
principle is non-intervention, but we also follow
the guideline of non-indifference. If we can help
we try to help, in many situations in different
degrees, and I don’t want to put too much value
on this, but in Ecuador we were there, in Bolivia
in previous situations also, but the conditions have
to be there, sometimes you have to create
confidence, and to do so involves not only political
conditions but also economic and social
conditions. It takes time. FT: Has this approach enabled you to have
influence in Venezuela?
MR AMORIM: You have to judge. Our
objective is not to have influence, to make
Venezuela part of the Brazilian sphere of
influence, but if you mean to have dialogue... The
meeting of the South American Community of
Nations here was totally new. People pointed to
disagreements and there were for sure, but the
leaders of the South American countries had never
talked so freely among themselves. And of course
you only heard part of it, there was a retreat just
for the presidents. This creates an atmosphere that
is helpful not for intervention but for good work
– to make the dialogue more fluid, and this
atmosphere is something new. In the past
whenever we held discussions it was under the
eye of the north, at the summit of the Americas,
but not among ourselves. And now we are meeting
among ourselves.
FT: Has this been true of the Bolivian
crisis?
MR AMORIM: If you had taken the
attitude that many did in Brazil – and today I don’t
think they would, but that they claimed they would
take – then you would have had a history of
radicalisation. You say words and you are stuck
with them. We discussed, we reacted, we didn’t
overreact, we defended our interests in a pragmatic
away and also defended Bolivian interests. The
potential for problems between Brazil and Bolivia
is very big. We have a big border that was a dead
border and is now a live border. We have gas
pipelines, we have Brazilians in Bolivia and
Bolivians in Brazil, we have resources – what we
are trying to do is work on these things seeing
them more as opportunities for cooperation than
taking unilateral decisions that precipitate other
unilateral decisions.
