Global South-South Development Expo 2010
Discurso do Ministro Celso Amorim por ocasião da abertura da
“Global South-South Development Expo 2010” - Genebra, 22/11/2010
Discurso proferido na sede da Organização
Internacional do Trabalho (OIT).
(Original em inglês)
Ambassador Juan Somavia, Director-General
of the ILO;
President Michelle Bachelet, great Latin
American leader of whom we are very proud
and Director of UN Women;
Mr. Yiping Zhou, Director of the Special Unit
for South-South Cooperation;
Mr. Marius Fransman, Deputy Minister of
South Africa.
First of all, Juan, let me tell you that I really
feel at home here. Here, I was able to expose
some ideas, to fight some battles, normally
in favor of cooperation in general, but also
of South-South cooperation and in favor of
solidarity and tolerance, which I think are very
important values that we should have in mind.
If I may, since this is probably my farewell -
at least at this stage - from Geneva settings, and
there could be no more appropriate setting than
ILO, let me just mention to you that in my office,
if you allow me to be a little bit personal, in my
office there is a big map. Actually it is a tapestry
based on a 16th century map in which what is
North is at the bottom of the map and what is
south is on the top of the map. And most of my
visitors who come there ask why is this map
inverted? Why is it wrong? And I say: “well, it is
not necessarily wrong. It is only our prejudices
that make it wrong.” I mean, there was no one
from Mars or from the Moon that would see
the world as necessarily the north being on
top and the south being at the bottom. This is
purely prejudice. I just mentioned that because,
probably as in relation to so many other things,
in relation to South-South cooperation - and I
am seeing Mr. Martin Khor here who is a very
strong fighter for South-South cooperation for a
long time, among other friends -, I think in so
many other things, the most difficult thing is to
break mental barriers. And this is true, also, in
relation to South-South cooperation.
I remember - Alberto Dumont is here and
I don’t know if the same thing happened in
Argentina - but I remember when, maybe 20,
25 years ago, we started the first steps towards
MERCOSUL, many people in Brazil, including,
I’d say, distinguished people would say: “why
are you losing your time with poor countries?
You should be dealing with the United States
or with Europe. What will Argentina and Brazil
do together?” I mean, you are just joining the
poverty of both countries. Well, this was the
embryo of MERCOSUL - which we have the
pleasure and the honor of having Chile as an
associate, which has grown into UNASUL in a certain way, presided for some time by Madame
Bachelet - and nobody would question the
importance of MERCOSUL or UNASUL today.
Actually, when we were creating UNASUL,
many critics in Brazil even asked me: “why
do you worry so much with South America?”
And I said: “well, I worry with South America
because I live here. If I lived in Europe I would
worry with Europe. But I live here. So I have
to worry with South America and see if it is
right and see if the things are right.” So, it took,
maybe, a long time for people to get accustomed
and maybe unfortunately - I say unfortunately
because it still shows that we still have a very
strong colonial mindset - it took an invitation by
President Obama to have a meeting to UNASUL
for people, even in our own country, to see that
UNASUL was a legitimate way of organizing
ourselves, without necessarily confronting other
groups.
So, I mentioned this question of the mental
barriers because I think if you are not able to
break them you won’t go anywhere. And I
am very happy to be here and to speak a little
bit - not much, I promise - about South South
cooperation. And I am happy to say that because
South South cooperation, to a large extent, has
been one of the Leitmotifs of President Lula’s
term of office, two terms of office. Because
we didn’t have prejudice. And, of course, we
wish to have good relations with the North. The
United States continues to be a very strong and
important partner. No longer the most important.
The most important now is China; the second
one is Argentina; but the United States still
has an honorable third place which, of course,
is important for us and all this happened at the
same time as our exports to the United States
increased. And at the same time as the United
States has with Brazil its biggest surplus in the
world.
So, the relations continue to be strong, we
continue to receive investments from the United
162
States, as we receive from China and so on, and
we are very happy. But we had in mind this
possibility of breaking mental barriers, and we
have to break mental barriers even in relation to
our region, so we can imagine beyond our region,
proposing a meeting between South American
and Arab countries. Again, I must say, we had a
great honor to see President Bachelet presiding
South America for the South American Union
in the meeting in Doha. [The] First meeting
took place in Brazil and the second took place
in Doha. Then I said, maybe with some, how
should I put it, hyperbolic tendency that I have,
that when we created the South American-Arab
Countries Summit, we were somehow affecting
the tectonic plates on which international
geopolitics is based.
I will tell you just one story, just to be very
quick in relation to that. When we started doing
that, I remember a young lady, who was a
journalist, an Egyptian journalist, who said, “but
why are you trying to do this summit between
South America and the Arab countries?” And
I tried to explain all the past and the influence
that the Arabs had in our countries, in all of
our countries by the way. She was not totally
convinced, but it was ok. Then, two years later,
we had the first summit, and this same lady came
to me and said: “why didn’t you have this idea of
having this summit before?”
So, you know, this shows very clearly that the
biggest barriers that we have to overcome are the
mental barriers. And the same thing happened in
relation to Africa. So, everyone, when President
Lula started his visits to Africa, again, the same
question that was posed, of course on a different
level, about South-American integration, it was
put again: “but why is president Lula losing his
time with Africa? He should go to Washington
DC, or Brussels, or Paris”. Of course, he would
go, and he did go, also to Washington DC,
Brussels and Paris, but he also went to Africa
many times. And nowadays, and it may be, and I must say, Mr. Yiping, it took the visit of Hu
Jintao to Africa, for people to say “why doesn’t
President Lula go more often to Africa?” But it
was a difficult thing. Nowadays, Africa, if you
take Africa as a single country, and I admit it is
an artificial way of putting it, but it would be our
fourth trading partner. After China, Argentina,
and the United States. Well, Argentina depends
on exports and imports; maybe it would be China,
United States and Argentina. Anyway, and then
it would be Africa. Again, it is breaking barriers;
why am I saying that? I don’t think that South
South cooperation should be only the icing of an
empty cake. South South cooperation is part of
an attitude, a broad attitude that has to do with
trade, with investment and with politics. And as
I said, and have being saying some times, not to
confront the north, or not to ignore the North.
I think President Somavia very well put it
that we are all on the same boat. And of course,
the United States, Europe and Japan continue
to be of extreme importance for us. But it was,
I believe, thanks to the possibility of our better
coordination. Take the trade field for example,
the coordination that we started in the WTO
G-20 that made us more respected. And which
changed, I mean, for people who know the
WTO, it changed forever, forever - I am able
to say those things, maybe there will be other
changes in the future - but it changed forever the
pattern of the negotiations in the WTO.
I mean, I am an old hand in those things, I
don’t say that with pride, necessarily. But I am an
old hand on these things. I remember when there
were the meetings of the Quad, and the Quad
was United States, European Union, Canada
and Japan. And then, during these rounds, which
unfortunately we did not conclude yet - but I still
hope that we will be able to conclude at some
point, and I am saying we, in a general sense, in
a mankind sense -, when people said for one time
G- 4, which will be the equivalent of the Quad, it
was United States, European Union, Brazil and
India. But Brazil and India representing by and
large the G-20 and other developing countries.
So, these are sea-changes due to South-South
Cooperation. So, I say that because, of course,
I agree with Mr. Yipping that we should fight
for solutions, solutions, solutions. But solutions,
solutions, solutions cannot be sought, [or] only
be seen at the micro level, they have to be seen at
the broad level, at the broad picture, and we have
to be happy to be dictated by an attitude in which
we respect ourselves, and therefore, as president
Lula likes to say, become also respected by
others.
Well, I am sure there will be many seminars
and fora in which our people, as well as people
from other countries, will be mentioning
concrete projects. We are very proud of our
projects with IBSA. IBSA itself was again some
sort of revolutionary thinking, because what
have brought the countries of IBSA together?
Well, these three big democracies, not the
only ones, but three big democracies; these are
multicultural societies, multiethnic, proud to be
multiethnic, living in three different continents.
This was an important thing and from there we
develop projects in Haiti, Guinea Bissau and
many others.
When it comes to our own cooperation, I don’t
want to give you numbers or describe projects
in detail, because I think that this would be too
boring, but let me mention two projects, apart
from so many others. One is the cotton farm that
we are helping in Mali and the other one is the
retroviral unit of medicament in Mozambique.
Why do I mention these two? Because the
project in Mali is linked not only to improve the
quality of the cotton produced not only in Mali,
but in the four countries of the so-called cotton
four, which are very poor countries and I visited
them and I have been there, not only project for
that, but also project that is trying, in the sense of
aid for trade, which people talk so much about it
in the WTO, to face one of the greatest injustices, which is the presence of strong subsidies in rich
countries.
Because, very often, what happens to the
cooperation that we receive from the north is that
they give with one hand and they take away with
the other hand. What we are trying to do here is
the opposite. We are trying to fight for our rights
in the WTO, at the same time enabling poorer
countries, for example the countries of the C-4,
to produce something that can be sold in the
world market and which is essential to their own
survival. And the same goes to Mozambique.
In Mozambique, we are opening now - and it is
very difficult, because we have to fight with our
own bureaucracy, with their own bureaucracy,
with international bureaucracy, with all kind of
pressure that also exists - we are establishing a
factory of anti-retroviral drugs, an anti-retroviral
generic drugs, again it is a way of showing that
we are not only fighting in abstract for rights
that we will never exercise, as it might be the
case, but when you fight for having the right to
put life before greed in the question of patents
and medicaments. We are also trying to produce
them and to help people to be able to save the
life of children and women and so forth.
I would like to mention a third project,
if I may, and then I’ll finish, because I have
spoken too much. One week ago, I went to the
Democratic Republic of Congo, because we
made a small contribution, but big for Brazil,
one million dollars for the project of violence,
especially sexual violence against women, in
situation of armed conflict. And why do I say
that? Because all of you here, myself also in
the past have been there, we are all members,
or from time to time, we are members of the
Human Rights Council and all of us fight for
human rights. Our Ambassador here, Madam
Farani Azevêdo, is now one the facilitator of
some of the negotiations. But we know that,
very often, at the Human Rights Council,
people are not actually trying to improve the
164
real situation of people on the ground. They
are just trying to have a diploma to put behind
their desks, such as my map, to have it behind
their desk to say: “I condemn such and such a
country”. But did you see if the situation on that
country improved? Did you see if the miserable
people in Haiti got a better life? Did you see if
the women who have been violated during the
civil conflicts in Congo are being treated? These
are the real problems. I’m not saying that from
time to time we shouldn’t condemn or criticize
some one, because that is also an encouragement
to improve, but the most import thing is to
establish a dialogue and to have concrete action
in the field that would certainly improve life of
people.
Final comment, I always had a great difficulty
with these nomenclatures in international
cooperation, this idea of donor and recipients,
in which donors give, including not only money
but they also give orders; and recipients receive
some money and a lot of orders. I think we
should not be donors and recipients, we should
be partners; we are partners fighting for the
improvement of the world. Because the way the
situation goes in the Democratic Republic of
Congo or in Haiti, in a way or another, will affect
us. So we are buying our own peace of mind,
our own certainty that no cholera epidemic will
spread over the continent, and that no conflict
will do to our border. So this is the way we try
to see and this is the way President Lula tries to
implement and thank you very much once again,
Juan Somavia for bringing us together.
Thank you.
