Brasil - Canadá


Discurso do Ministro de Estado das Relações Exteriores,
Embaixador Luiz Felipe Lampreia, na cerimônia de assinatura do acordo de cooperação nuclear entre o Brasil e o
Canadá, Brasília, 22 de maio de 1996


I would like to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
and your party in this visit to Brasilia.
Your presence among us reflects the quality
of the friendship between Canada and Brazil and the
continued strengthening of our bilateral relations.
This strengthening of our ties gives us motive
for great satisfaction, but it also challenges us to
elevate the relationship between our two countries to
new heights.
I am sure that we will face this challenge with
determination and enthusiasm.
Your Excellency’s visit takes place in a
particularly significant moment for our relations, as
we begin preparations for President Fernando
Henrique Cardoso’s official visit to Canada in
September.
Your presence here also gives us a unique
opportunity to review the results of the visit to Brazil
of Prime-Minister Jean Chrétien - the first Head of
State or Government to visit President Cardoso after
he took office in January of last year - and to exchange
views on the main issues on the international agenda
of interest to both our countries.
This first-hand contact among us is extremely
valuable for better mutual knowledge and for greater
coordination between our countries.
An industrialized nation, an exporter of
capital, a source of advanced technology and a
significant force in international trade, Canada is a
priority of Brazilian foreign policy.
We recognize and appreciate Canada’s
constructive role and traditionally balanced stance in
multilateral fora, its autonomy and its influence on the
international decision-making process.
We have worked together in areas of our
common interest directly linked to our reality as
countries of continental size, with a tradition of
peaceful and universal participation and with a
capacity to act on a global scale.
The protection of the environment and the
promotion of sustainable development; the fight for
human rights, unimpeded access to high technology;
the reform of the United Nations; hemispheric
integration; the strengthening of the multilateral trade
system, under the WTO; disarmament and nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction - these
are issues which have been the object of our
cooperation and dialogue.
And this cooperation is reinforced today by
the signing of the Agreement on Nuclear Cooperation,
which will allow us to further relations between our
two countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
especially in areas such as agriculture, food
conservation, medicine and the generation of
electricity.
The Agreement has strict physical protection
and safety measures, so as to avoid any risk of nuclear
accident, and is fully compatible with the objective shared by Brazil and Canada of nonproliferation of
nuclear weapons.
Mr. Minister, Brazil and Canada have much
to offer one another.
We have many areas of identity, shared
interests and common efforts.
But we also have a vast agenda to explore.
We want Canada to play a role in the future
of prosperity, economic freedom and growth with
social justice that we are building in Brazil.
I am certain that your visit will give a new
impulse to our common goal of bringing closer
together Canadians and Brazilians.
Thank you.