Statement by Minister Celso Amorim on behalf
of the G-20, em Hong Kong, China, em 17 de
dezembro de 2005
Mr. President,
I will speak first on behalf of the G-20 and,
subsequently, I will make some specific remarks on
other points of the Ministerial Declaration on behalf
of Brazil.
The G-20 is a developing country grouping
dedicated to agriculture. On this issue, central to
development and to the Round, we have consistently
stressed the need for the removal of distortions in
agricultural trade. It is central to the Round and central
to developing countries. We have made progress
since July 2004. Nevertheless, this progress has been
rather faltering and insufficient.
The G-20 has made positive contributions to
the negotiating process in substance and in process,
with a forward looking attitude and its commitment
to ambitious results in agriculture in line with the Doha
Mandate. The Group has tabled a complete set of
proposals in all three pillars of the negotiation. Given
the diversity of its composition, the Group’s proposals
in themselves represent a balanced view. The G-20
is living proof that a “bottom-up” approach is feasible
and capable of forging the necessary compromises.
The Group has changed the nature of the negotiating
process in the WTO, playing a constructive role,
enhancing transparency and promoting inclusiveness.
Throughout this process, the G-20 has
preserved its unity. More than that, the G-20 has been
capable of going beyond the Group’s confines.
Indeed, Hong Kong witnessed the unprecedented
Ministerial Meeting between the G-20, the G-33, the
ACP, the LDCs, the African Group, and the Small
Economies. Whilst recognizing their diversity, the
Groups vowed to intensify their dialogue, with a view
to ensuring that the negotiations lead to an outcome consistent with the development mandate of the Doha
Round. Efforts to divide and separate developing
countries came to nothing. Efforts to de-legitimize our
demands lost credibility.
The expectations for the Hong Kong
Ministerial were low. Elements for the central bargains
were not there. Key players have been unable or
unwilling to engage. This was clearly reflected in the
Draft Ministerial text, which fell far short of what is
needed to complete modalities. We had hoped,
however, that our partners would feel the importance
of the hour and make at least some gestures that would
provide the necessary impetus for continuing the
negotiations. We haven’t seen any such gestures as
yet.
The text before us marginally improves the
original draft. Even within the confines of limited
expectations, it should have gone farther. An
unequivocal reaffirmation of the July 2004
Framework is required. Furthermore, it is necessary
to make it clear that developing country members
will be placed on a fourth band for the purpose of
cutting their AMS and their overall trade-distorting
support. Also, we should provide for a linear cut in
Market Access, so as to be in line with amendments
in other areas of the Declaration.
As you have said, Mr. President, agriculture
is the engine of the Round and the engine is losing
steam. There is urgent need for a political reaffirmation
of commitment to the Round. And it is essential that
this reaffirmation be made with regard to agriculture.
Setting the date for the elimination of all forms
of export subsidies can provide that reaffirmation.
There is no justification for the continuation of export
subsidies, the most distorting form of support. There
are no ethical, economic or social reasons to justify
their maintenance. There is already an agreement to
eliminate them. What we need is a credible end date.
Such date is 2010.
We also wish to reaffirm our solidarity to the
aspirations of poor cotton producing countries of
Africa that is shared by other producers in the
developing world.
Mr. President,
I wish to add some elements in the
representation of my own country regarding other
aspects of the draft Ministerial Declaration.
Our concerns in NAMA regard the balanced
treatment of this subject and agriculture. In the
adoption of any formula in NAMA, it should be made
clear the operation of the principle of “less than full
reciprocity” in reduction commitments.
It will be also important that the question of
flexibilities for developing countries be considered an
integral and stand-alone part of the modalities.
In this respect, I would like to indicate that
Brazil together with the group known as NAMA
Eleven will be forwarding our concerns to the
President on the NAMA text.
I understand the work undertaken with
respect to services has started to address the
concerns of G-90 delegations regarding excessive
prescriptiveness of the text.
I wish also to highlight that it is necessary to
agree on a mandate to initiate negotiations on the
relation between TRIPS and CBD.
Thank you, Mr. President.
