“Unfinished Business”
Artigo do Ministro Celso Amorim publicado no
International Herald Tribune, 10/12/2005
The remark by the French statesman Georges
Clemenceau that war is too important to be left to
the generals could be applied to the Doha round of
world trade talks as we approach next week’s Hong
Kong ministerial meeting.
That was the reasoning behind the suggestion
made last week by Brazil’s president, Luiz Inácio Lula
da Silva, to Britain’s prime minister, Tony Blair: that a
conference of world leaders be convened in order to
give new impetus to WTO negotiations. The present
deadlock in trade talks demands the vision and
commitment that could perhaps only be achieved
through the personal engagement of heads of state
and government.
Fortunately trade is no longer cause for war,
but it still affects the lives of millions of people and
can be a matter of life and death, particularly in poor
countries. International trade can be a fundamental
tool for raising standards of living, improving income
distribution and combating poverty and hunger. It can
lead to the promotion of peace and security and even
contribute to the fight against terrorism.
Almost 60 years ago, world leaders decided
to include trade in the multilateral agenda. The creation
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and
successive rounds of negotiation, led to an
unprecedented liberalization in the international flow
of industrial goods, which, in turn, became one of the
main drivers of global economic growth. But this
growth was uneven. Most notably, gains were very
limited for poor countries that are heavily dependent on agriculture.
The Doha development agenda was meant
to address the unfinished business of the previous
rounds, by correcting the ever-growing gap between
rich and poor nations and the gap in the existing trade
rules for industrial and agricultural goods. One gap
compounds the other. The central idea behind the
Doha agenda is to redress the development deficit in
world trade, by allowing developing countries to
benefit from their comparative advantages, most of
all in agriculture.
The successful conclusion of the Doha round
will depend on credible and courageous moves from
all parties. Brazil is ready to do its part in the hopes
that others will do the same. Together with our partners
in South America’s Mercosur trade group, we have
expressed our willingness to offer duty free and quota
free access for products coming from least developed
countries, especially from Africa and Latin America.
The Group of 20 has tabled comprehensive,
balanced proposals that are ambitious and realistic.
Their legitimacy stems from the G-20’s diversity: large
agricultural exporters, countries that rely on family
agriculture and least developed countries.
The ball is now in the other court. The United
States presented an important, although insufficient,
offer in domestic support, which was not matched
by the European Union response in market access.
The logic of the negotiations requires that a more
significant move be made in this area, in which the
EU has a special responsibility.
The major economies, which are responsible
for the greatest distortions in agricultural trade, must
show the political will necessary to bridge the wide
differences that still exist in the negotiations. They
cannot expect more concessions in industrial goods
and services from developing countries than what they
are willing to offer in agriculture.
As Blair said, agriculture accounts for only 2
percent of employment in the richest countries.
Furthermore, billions of dollars in subsidies, and other
trade barriers in agriculture, benefit mostly a few
426
privileged individuals and companies in developed
countries, to the detriment of their own consumers
and of the farmers of poor nations worldwide.
The elimination of such distorting practices is
essential for progress of developing countries and of
the world economy as a whole. We cannot abandon
the level of ambition of Doha and accept a trade round
on the cheap. The world cannot wait another 20 years
for a true reform of agricultural trade. That is why a
bad agreement would be worse than no agreement.
Many of us had hoped to define the outline of
our agreement in Hong Kong. At the very least, we
should aim at a credible date for total elimination of
export subsidies and equivalent forms of support. This
now seems uncertain. But we have to continue our
fight against subsidies and other trade-distorting
practices for as long as it takes.
Two hundred years of social progress were
unable to erase the last remnants of feudalism and
other forms of privileges that still prevail in agricultural
production and trade. This constitutes the real
unfinished business we have to address.
