Almoço oferecido aos chanceleres e
chefes de delegação do grupo latinoamericano e do Caribe na ONU
Discurso do Senhor Ministro de Estado das Relações
Exteriores, Embaixador Luiz Felipe Lampreia, por
ocasião do almoço que oferece aos chanceleres e chefes
de delegação do grupo latino-americano e do Caribe nas
Nações Unidas. Nova York, 23 de setembro de 1997
I wish to welcome ali the Foreign Ministers
and Heads ofDelegation from Latin America and the
Caribbean who have honored us with theirpresence
at this luncheon, which has already become a New
York tradition for GRULAC.
I would like to greet the Ministers who join
US for the first time, thereby contributing to the natural
diplomatic renewal to which we are ali accustomed.
It is important that through our annual
gathering at the beginning ofthe session ofthe General
Assembly we should be able to demonstrate the unity
and cohesion of our group as well as to pursue an
informal exchange on the priority items in the agenda
which brought us to New York.
This agenda contains several elements of
direct regional interest which require a systematic
effort to aciiieve the proper degree ofcoordination
and consultation.
The task at hand does not merely consist in
preserving a formal mechanism or keeping alive a
tradition. Our region now faces the challenge of living
up to a legacy ofmore than fífty years of active and
effective work on behalfofthe United Nations and,
very especially, ofthe General Assembly.This year, as the opening statements in the
General Assembly have made clear, the reform of
the United Nations seems destined to dominate a
significant portion of our debates. This should not
come as a surprise, although what does constitute a
novelty, in my view, is the fact that we ha\'e entered
this 52nd General Assembly under the clear and
striking sign ofa new kind ofleadership in the United
Nations.
This leadership has been displayed both by
the Secretary-General, Mr Kofi Annan, and by the
President ofthe 51 st General Assembly, Ambassador
Razali Ismail, each in his own way. Having gone
through a period during which an impression of
paralysis and perplexity was produced, we are moving
again toward more defined objectives, with clearer
ideas and, above ali, with the sensation that the
strengthening ofthe United Nations will be pursued
with determination.
Such leadership wi II allow the reform process
which we have ali been advocating to take off.
1 am aware of the fact that we have not
reached consensus within our region on the fomnat,
the scope or the details ofthe reform ofthe United
Nations, in its diflferent dimensions.
It is natural and understandable that this shoLild be so. A few basic guidelines shoutd
neveitheless be drawn for the orientation ofour worií,
The first one has to do with our willingness to ensure
tliat our regioii continue to participate flilly and actively
in the work ofthe Organization, and, particularly, in
the discussions and negotiations related to the refonn
process.
A second one can be expressed in terms of
the unacceptability of reforms which, explicitly cr
indirectly, Lnclude any form ofdiscrimination against
tleveloping countries in general or countries from our
rcgion in particular, or that may entail a weakening of
the voice of Latin America and the Caribbean in
intemational fora.
The Ihird consists in the need for us to work
together in order to neutralize an unfortunate
perceplion which, although artificially created, has
gained ground in certain diplomatic and press circles:
nameiy, that our region runs the risk ofdeveloping an
arms race,
It would be most unfortunate ifthis totally felse
and improbable perception were to acquire any
credibility before the eyes of the intemational
comiminity. Ours is a stable and democratic region,
and it has cost us much effort to reach this situation.
We are invotved in several regional integration
projects which have had the politicai and strategiccffect ofeliininating rivairies and establishing a new
atmosphere of understanding and cooperation.
It would be indeed contradictoiy for countries
interested in consolidating trust among regional and
intemational partners to contemplate adventurous
behavior through weapons acquisitions that would be
incompatible with their other policies. Even more
contradictory would be any attempt to create wrong
impressions when we ali know that an arms race is
neither desired nor possible nor admissible.
There is no risk ofan arms race in our region,
and we should not act in such a manner as to create
the impression that such a possibility is admissible.
To defend the disarmament ofthe disarmed defies
logic.
We ali know that the militaiy expenses in Latin
America and the Caribbean are the lowest in the world
and that the purchases ofmilitary equipment that do
take place aim at replacing old or obsolete material.
It would be most regrettable if we were to allow a
misperception to become aproblem, with so many
positive elements in our favor.
Excellencies,
Our identity in this world of almost two
hundred countries (four times more than when the
UN was created) is shaped by our region, our
geographic and politicai circumstances, our group of
Latin American and Caribbean Nations.
Upon this note of solidarity, ofcohesion and
conmion politicai will, I wish to raise a toast to ali of
you once again and wish youhappiness. Let us cherish
our Latin American and Caribbean friendship.
Thank you.