Comemorações dos 60 anos da
Independência da Índia
Discurso do Ministro de Estado das Relações Exteriores,
Embaixador Celso Amorim, por ocasião das
comemorações dos 60 anos da Independência da Índia.
Nova York, Estados Unidos, 23 de setembro de 2007
Dear Minister Chidambaram, Finance
Minister of India,
Mr. Sunil Mittal, President of the
Confederation of Indian Industry,
Mr. Nandan Nilekani, Chairman of the
Steering Committee India@60,
Dr. Henry Kissinger, co-Chair of
India@60,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure to be here tonight to
celebrate India’s Independence. I understand that
my presence here is a tribute to the excellent
relations between Brazil and India.
The very existence of Brazil as a country
is linked to the fact that the Portuguese were trying
to find their way to India more than five centuries
ago. By then, Indian civilization dated back several
thousand years.
India exerts great fascination for the
extraordinary diversity of its population,
languages, cultures, religions, arts and philosophy.
The magnificent Indian mosaic of civilizations
coexists with the largest democracy on the planet.
This unique social and political architecture owes
a lot to the humanistic and political vision of two
great men: Nehru and Gandhi. Both of them were
symbols of a new era and remain a source of
inspiration.
Nehru and Gandhi believed that
democracy and tolerance were the best tools to
fight hunger and poverty. So does President Lula,
who was distinguished this year with the Nehru
Award. This distinction had a very special
meaning in the context of the recent intensification
of the relations between our two countries.
President Lula has already paid two visits
to India and Prime Minister Singh visited Brazil
in 2006. We have been extending our bilateral
cooperation to new areas, such as science and
technology, pharmaceuticals, space and energy, in
particular bio-fuels. Trade has been steadily
growing. We aim at reaching US$ 10 billion by
2010.
We have also put forward a strategic
dialogue on major global issues, from security to
climate change. We have been supporting political
as well as social democracy, promoting free and
fair trade and making development a top priority
for the international community.
We both favour South-South cooperation.
A groundbreaking initiative in this regard is the
India, Brazil and South Africa Dialogue Forum,
known as IBSA. Three democracies from the
developing world, one in each continent: Africa,
Asia and South America. Along with projects in several areas for the
benefit of our own peoples, IBSA has been
engaged in cooperating with poorer countries. The
IBSA Fund has already helped finance specific
projects in Guinea-Bissau and Haiti, two very poor
nations. When I visited Haiti two days ago, I was
proud to learn that our project for treatment of
solid waste had been selected by international
institutions as a model for other peace-building
initiatives. The IBSA Fund is a proof that you don’t
need to be rich to show solidarity.
Brazil and India have been cooperating in
multilateral fora to promote the democratization
of global governance. In our dialogue with the G-
8 countries, we have been putting forward interests
and views of developing countries. I’m glad to
note that among developed countries a new
attitude is emerging, as illustrated by a recent
proposal by President Sarkozy of France.
The emergence of the G-20 in WTO – a
process in which Brazil and India have had a
leading role – was a turning-point in the history
of multilateral trade negotiations. The G-20 is a
far-reaching, diverse coalition, with concrete
proposals and sound contributions. My friend, the
116
Indian Trade Minister Kamal Nath and myself
have been struggling together to bring the so-
called Doha Development Agenda to a conclusion
worth of its name.
At the United Nations, Brazil and India
have been emphasizing the need for urgent,
comprehensive reform. An expanded, more
accountable, more democratic Security Council
is an essential element to further enhance UN
effectiveness and legitimacy.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Brazil and India are continental-size
democracies with complex societies and large,
fast-growing economies.
Our two countries are forging a solid
alliance. Our understanding is broad in scope,
rooted in shared values and inspired by similar
views of international affairs. I’m sure this
partnership will lead us through the next 60 years
and beyond. It’s also my hope that it will help
build a more open, peaceful and multipolar world.
Long live social justice! Long live peace!
Long live democracy! Long live Indian-Brazilian
friendship!
