Entrevista concedida pelo Ministro das
Relações Exteriores, Embaixador Celso
Amorim, a jornal indiano (Nova Délhi, Índia,
17/07/2007)
Divulgação
On the eve of the India-Brazil-South Africa
(IBSA) Foreign Ministers meeting in New Delhi,
Brazil’s Foreign Minister Celso Amorim spoke
to “The Hindu” about the future and significance
of the tri-continental grouping for the evolving
international system.
Celso Amorim: “This is the first time you
have some developing countries joining forces to
help other countries that are poorer than
themselves.”
The Hindu: After initial scepticism and
disinterest, the rest of the world finally seems to
have woken up to the reality and significance of
IBSA. As one of the inventors of this grouping in
2003, tell us a little about what you had in mind
then and where you see it heading today.
Celso Amorim: I can tell you about the
origin of IBSA very precisely. It was on the second
day of Lula’s first administration. I received South
Africa’s Foreign Minister, Nkosazana Dlamini
Zuma, and she mentioned the idea of having a
new group of developing countries because the
old groupings like the G15, though useful, were
not working very well to create programmes of
South-South cooperation. She had several ideas
and I told her, let’s do something simple, let us
start with three countries in each continent —
Brazil, India, and South Africa. There was a logic
to this. Our countries had lots of similarities in
terms of our positions in international fora — from
human rights to disarmament, the World Trade
Organisation, Security Council. Since she was
going to India, I asked her to mention it to our
Indian counterpart. And five or six months later,
[the then Indian External Affairs] Minister
[Yashwant] Sinha came to Brazil for a bilateral,
and I said, why don’t we have a meeting of the
three of us. So we had an informal meeting and
from then on we created the IBSA forum. Last
year, we had the first summit and we will meet
again at the highest level this October.
I agree interest today is growing, certainly
in our own countries — it is an educational process
for our own people because we are more used to
looking to Europe, the U.S. or our respective
regions. This idea of three big democracies, three
multicultural countries in three different parts of
the world, is a very special thing and now others
are mentioning it. Not only countries like China
and Russia are getting interested but even [U.S.
Secretary of State] Condoleezza Rice, when she
came to Brazil, spoke about IBSA as an important
development because of the democratic element
that is present there. Of course, IBSA is not
discriminatory, we are prepared to discuss with
other countries. But I think Brazil, South Africa,
and India have very special commonalities. The Hindu: In which direction do you see
IBSA evolving?
Celso Amorim: There are basically three
dimensions. First is the development of joint
projects of our own — in S&T, health, transport,
commerce. In other words, cooperation among
ourselves for projects directed towards our own
progress. Second is our cooperation vis-À-vis
poorer countries. This is the first time you have
some developing countries joining forces to help
other countries that are poorer than themselves.
We already have very successful projects in Haiti
and Guinea-Bissau and I think we should move
to other areas like Zambia or Burundi, or some
country in Asia. Being poor does not mean you
cannot have solidarity. And we’ve created a fund.
At four billion dollars, it’s not a huge fund but it
will grow by a billion every year. The third
dimension is the reinforcement of our own
cooperation in international fora, like the reform
of the UNSC. We are members of G20 in the
WTO. President Lula has an expression —
changing the world’s geography. He actually spoke
of changing the commercial geography but I think
it’s not only the commercial but changing the way
people see the world. Helping the world to become
more multipolar. I think it’s good to have a more
democratic world, more countries that have
influence. I don’t want to be very prescriptive
because everything depends on the situation but
IBSA — either individually or jointly — could
help in situations like Palestine. We can help in
other situations, in Africa say, in which we may
have more of an opening for the countries
concerned than others.
The Hindu: Earlier this month,
Condoleezza Rice said the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) had no relevance and that
countries should get together on the basis of values
such as democracy. What do you think about the
future and relevance of NAM?
Celso Amorim: Speaking of ‘non-aligned’
today is a bit awkward because it is non-aligned
620
to what? But NAM may still have a role. This is
essentially a group of developing countries and
you have all shades of political positions. NAM
puts countries together, offers possibilities of
discussion. But I am more confident that
diversified coalitions in different formats can do
better work. I think IBSA is certainly one. We are
democracies, but when I say this, we are not
importing western style democracy. Each of our
countries is developing democracy in the full sense
but also with the social content which is very
important because it is not only the formalities of
democracy that count. We are countries with
multicultural situations but also problems. We are
all strategically located in each one of our regions.
So I think IBSA is probably more effective, which
doesn’t exclude other configurations. For
example, very often we speak of the BRICs and
we had a first meeting of [Brazil, Russia, India,
and China] which was a bit informal, arranged by
the Russians, at the U.N. General Assembly last
year and I think we should go on discussing these
things. I think there are different configurations
and we should not stick only to one. For example,
Brazil is a member of Mercosur, the South
American market. Sometimes people say, ‘Brazil
has Mercosur, and what about IBSA?’ Well, I think
a good strategic relation between Brazil and India
will only help Mercosur. My dream is countries
like India, Brazil, and South Africa — and the
whole of Mercosur and SACU [Southern African
Customs Union] — can form a big economic
space. Of course it will take time, but that will
enable us to be in a better position to face the North
in a creative, competitive way.
The Hindu: During the Heiligendamm G8
outreach meeting, President Lula said the outreach
countries should have their own forum. Prime
Minister Manmohan Singh also raised questions
about the utility of an outreach group as an
appendage to the G8.
Celso Amorim: Well, there’s not much
point for us to come for the dessert when the meal is over! There is a danger even, because sometimes
there is confusion because you participate in a
meeting and there is a document issued which is
not our document but we were half in the meeting
so people don’t know if we subscribe or not. So
we have to reflect on this. I don’t want to see only
the negative side. On the positive, there has been
this evolution. In the beginning, there was no
invitation, we were not there, there was no
dialogue. So it’s a beginning but it has to change,
and we have to move towards a G13 or something
like that in the near future. But as long as this
doesn’t happen, I think the G5 should meet among
themselves to have well-coordinated positions. We
may not agree on everything — this is natural.
The G8 don’t agree on everything either! But I
think it is important and that is why President Lula
raised this.
The Hindu: One of the IBSA projects that
has not gone far is UNSC reform. Should we
rethink the G4 concept? Should IBSA be cutting
edge, since the case of the three developing
countries is the most compelling?
Celso Amorim: These are historical
processes and we have to be a little patient. It takes
time to change the basic structures of the world. I
think IBSA certainly has a role in pushing the
reform but I think the G4 also has a role. Certainly,
India and Brazil have a very strong stake because
developing countries are the ones not represented.
But when discussions started about the UNSC in
1993, it was the opposite. Germany and Japan
were the strong candidates. Now that has changed.
But I think apart from big developing countries,
having countries with a strong influence in world
affairs is important. So I think the G4 has its
usefulness, which doesn’t exclude IBSA of course.
The Hindu: Once the Nuclear Suppliers
Group changes its rules to allow commerce with
India, what would be the scope for bilateral
cooperation with Brazil and India? Do you
envisage cooperation extending to the fuel cycle?
Celso Amorim: If you are able to develop
an effective safeguards agreement, I don’t see any
problem. I think we should start with the softer
areas, like nuclear medicine, the use of isotopes
for food preservation, but I don’t think we should
be limited to that. For us, the important thing is
that cooperation has to be for peaceful purposes.
If we can clearly isolate it from any other use, I
don’t see any problem.
The Hindu: If I can ask you a question
linked to the other hat you wear as Trade Minister,
does the failure of the Potsdam meeting of the
U.S., the EU, Brazil, and India last month mean
the end of the road for the Doha round?
The rich countries have to learn that they
cannot just put pressure on developing countries
and think they will have the result that they devised
as the one that is convenient for them. They have
to negotiate. They are used to negotiating among
themselves and coming to us with readymade
solutions. In Potsdam, they underestimated our
sense of balance and dignity. I don’t think they
necessarily did it in bad faith but it’s just old habits.
So now the situation is certainly more difficult
than it would have been, but I don’t think it’s
impossible.
When I look at the world and the need to
have measures that can really have an effect in
terms of combating poverty, crime, and even
terrorism, the best thing that can be done is a trade
deal that is really development friendly. And that
is what we’re looking for. Somehow, in the midst
of our negotiations, instead of having an
agreement for a development round, it became a
round in which the rich countries were looking
for advantages. We understand that in order for
the U.S. to sell reduction of subsidies, or for the
EU to sell larger increase in their markets, they
need to show something in return. But the big
thing in return would be that both [rich and poor]
are reforming at the same time. They can’t reverse
the order of things and make openings in industry,
NAMA, or openings in special products in India
as the key to the round. That is the opposite! They have the key to the round. If you reduce subsidies
to what they should be — the G20 proposal is
$12.1 billion, which is still more than what they
spent last year — then of course we will also
move. But you can’t reverse the order of things
and have a knife in our chest and say that if you
don’t move in NAMA and industrial products, there
will be no round. Come on! This is no more the
Uruguay round. This is the Doha development round.
The Hindu: Is the stalemate a blessing in
disguise because it forces countries like India,
Brazil, and South Africa to explore new
commercial geographies?
Celso Amorim: We should explore other
avenues. I think it would be very, very, very
important and I hope our heads of government
deal with that in October — the idea of having a
large economic space involving Brazil, Mercosur,
SACU and India ... But I still think the WTO is
important. Our relations with the rich world are
not minor.
We do need a system, rules which are
stable, which allow us to go for dispute settlement
— as we have done in the case of cotton, sugar,
U.S. subsidies. This system is necessary; we
cannot abandon it. [The stalemate] is a blessing
in disguise in that it alerts us to other possibilities
but we cannot take it too far on that road because
the WTO continues to be essential. It is the only
multilateral trade body there is.
(Siddharth Varadarajan)
