 Reunião Extraordinária da Comissão
Interina de Reconstrução do Haiti
Discurso do Ministro Celso Amorim na Reunião Extraordinária da
Comissão Interina de Reconstrução do Haiti – Nova York, 20/09/2010
Original em inglês
“I commend the Co-Chairs of the Interim
Haiti Reconstruction Commission – Prime-
Minister Bellerive and President Clinton – for
convening this extraordinary meeting. It is very
important to keep the high level of attention. I
could not think of a better way to start this week
of intense contacts in New York.
Six months ago, in the International Donor’s
Conference held at the UN headquarters, our
proclamations of goodwill were matched by
concrete pledges, with a renewed emphasis on
reconstruction and long-term development.
As a response to the 12 January
earthquake, Brazil has pledged more than
US$ 340 million in humanitarian assistance
and the reconstruction process. This figure
does not include almost US$ 280 million in
contributions to MINUSTAH since 2004.
Brazil was the first and is still to date the
major contributor to the Haiti Reconstruction
Fund. Of course, we would be very glad to
be surpassed soon. In this light, we are ready
to play a stronger role in the Commission’s
Secretariat.
This Interim Haiti Reconstruction
Commission has made an important
contribution to provide support and coherence
to our collective efforts. It must never
be forgotten that, for this Commission to
succeed, the Haitian Government must play
the leading role. Haiti is a sovereign country,
not a collection of projects.
President Clinton mentioned today the
importance of energy issues. As a response to
a request of President Préval to President Lula,
Brazil has financed the technical study on the
construction of the Artibonite hydroelectric
dam. This project – already approved by the
Interim Commission – will supply energy to
1 million Haitian citizens, bring irrigation to
local producers and employment opportunities.
Brazil is looking forward to partnerships to
build Artibonite dam. Brazil’s US$ 40 million
paid to the Reconstruction Fund could serve
as the downpayment to this end.
Besides our contribution to the emergency
aid and reconstruction, Brazil currently
develops more than 30 projects either
bilaterally or in partnership with third
countries or international institutions in areas
such as agriculture, food security, health,
education and institutional strengthening. I
would like to highlight our trilateral health program with Cuba and also the fact that
Brazil will soon receive 500 Haitian students
in our universities. 
Even before the earthquake, the situation
in Haiti had mobilized efforts of many
developing countries, such as the India-Brazil-
South Africa Forum cash for work project in
Carrefour-Feuilles (which received a prize
yesterday) and the decision by the Union of
South American Nations – UNASUL – to
cooperate with the Haitian government. 
The reconstruction process will only
progress at the necessary pace in a context
of political stability and institutional
consolidation. We praise President Préval and
the Haitian Government for their efforts to
ensure that the November elections take place
in accordance with the Haitian Constitution.
Brazil has always praised the role played by
CARICOM in lending regional legitimacy
throughout this process. 
MINUSTAH has to keep playing a
supportive role. It is a matter of conventional
wisdom that only after the second successive
election democracy may be considered
consolidated. In our view, MINUSTAH’s
level of engagement should remain unaltered
way well into the next President’s term. 
One word about the private sector. Several
Brazilian companies are interested – or are
already operating – in Haiti (in sectors such
as construction and bioenergy). I wish to
highlight the disposition of the Brazilian
textile industry to invest in Haiti, benefitting
from the US legislation HOPE II. On a very
pioneering gesture for a developing country,
and with the approval of our MERCOSUL
partner, we have offered reciprocity for US
firms wishing to export to Brazil”.
