Entrevista coletiva concedida pelo Ministro de
Estado das Relações Exteriores, Embaixador
Celso Amorim, após reunião do G-6, Genebra,
Suíça, 24 de julho de 2006
Good afternoon.
Let me start by saying what I said in the TNC.
This is indeed a sad moment. Of course, for someone
like me that has gone through several failures or
setbacks or crisis in the old GATT and in the WTO,
that should not be anything new. In a way, for me, it
brings me more sadness than others for two or three
reasons. One, because, for the first time, we are really
in a Development Round and what we were
discussing and what we were about to reach was an
agreement that would be, in my opinion, very positive
for developing countries. Sad also, because, unlike
situations like Seattle or Brussels, the Uruguay Round
or even Cancun, we were very close to an agreement.
I did not see any conceptual difference. There was
nothing like ‘what we want to have labor standards’
or ‘what we want to have environment’ and the other
would say you cannot have that. We have to had
some other subject, Singapore subject,whatever. We
were all discussing the same things. We were all
discussing within a range, which, of course, was not,
let us say, very, very small, but which was reachable
according to any analyst that would look at this figures.
432
Resenha de Pol. Ext. Brasil, a. 33, n. 99, 2o semestre 2006
I think that even if they were not part in the
negotiations, I think specially if they were not part in
the negotiations, they would come to the same
conclusions: that these gaps were reachable. So, that
makes us specially sad.
On the other hand, of course, I do not want
to give the impression that everything is lost. The
Ministers who were part of the G-6 and who spoke
expressed their commitment to continue discussing,
to show flexibility, to engage and so on. Which is
good, but of course may not be good enough. First
because they have expressed that before, we have
expressed that before and we were not able. And
second also because this is not like a situation in which
we all go to hibernate somewhere, to Davos maybe,
not the Davos of today, but the Davos of the Magic
Mountain. Stay there for one year or so and then we
come back here and go on. It is not like that. Life will
go on. Other priorities will appear. Other situations
will come. People may change. And all this makes
the situation a bit risky. Temptation, which I think
should be resisted, in my opinion, but temptation to
tinker here and there with previous agreements,
temptations to withdraw what was said, but not written
down may be there. And all these factors, of course,
may make it more difficult.
Of course, we were also, in a way, sad
because we have put so much work on that. I think
rarely have developing countries not only fought for
their interest, but developed so much technical work
as we did in the G-20 and if there is something to be
proud about is how the G-20 really changed the
geography and the geopolitics of these negotiations.
Not the G-20 alone. We have the other groups of
developing countries that have been very active also,
and I want to pay tribute to them, and you know the
enormous effort that we have always made to reach
out for them, but I believe it was the G-20, specially
that enabled us to arrive at the point that we arrived.
And it is not something to be treated lightly. I mean, if
you take Cancun, and what we were discussing in
Cancun, elimination of export subsidies was not sure thing. There were important trading partners that were
still speaking of a list of products, maybe, which
would be subject to elimination and the date was
uncertain. Now, we have established total elimination
by a precise date, with the elimination of equivalent
forms of support. We have come to a point in domestic
support, conceptually at least, where real constraints
will have to be put and effective cuts will have to take
place. And we have come, in market access, to a
situation in which some real market access will be
there. Whether it is enough or not, it is another matter.
I am speaking of agriculture.
So, all these things are relevant things. All these
things cannot be lost and it will be our collective task
to ensure that they do not disappear into thin air with
this suspension, but, of course, you can never be sure
and that is the reason why we have concerns.
Referring to these more immediate situations
into the meetings that we just had, again, it was
disappointing because less than two weeks ago, one
week ago more or less, we had a mandate, and I say
we because even Presidents or Prime-Ministers of
developing countries were also there and also the
President of the African Union. So, we received a
mandate to conclude the Round, to show flexibility
and, as I said, I think seldom in the world’s history, a
mandate given by a Prime-Minister were so quickly
discarded, and that is sad. That is sad for the WTO
and that is sad as a signal for how world business is
conducted. And that is also part of the reason why I
have been saying that trade negotiations maybe have
become too serious to be left to trade negotiators
alone.
Well, concerning the concrete themes that we
discussed, I am now speaking for Brazil. Others can
say we came here willing to show flexibility. Flexibility
both in terms of our offensive objectives and flexibility
also in terms of things that are demanded from us. Of
course, always taking into account that this is a
Development Round and that all concessions have
to be proportionate to the capacity of the different
countries and the different members, but as it
happened, there was not even a moment to test if
Brazil was flexible or not because we have just
stumbled on problems before that, before we have
arrived at that point. And, of course, I will not fall
into the temptation of finding culprits individually or
countries, but one has to recognize, at least that is my
assessment, others may have another assessment, that
the area in which we were lagging behind more clearly
was domestic support. And, of course, if leadership
was shown in relation to domestic support, I would
not say that we would have a guarantee that everything
would fall into place, but there was a strong possibility
that everything would fall into place. One point here
and there, two points here and there.
As it were, it did not happen. I do not want
to go into the reasons why it did not happen. I do not
want to say whether the explanations given are
justified or not. I do not think, at this point, that this is
productive, but the fact is that although the leaders
asked for flexibility. This could not materialize in
concrete numbers.
So, this is the situation now. I do not want to
preclude what Pascal would say here. Of course he
would probably say in much more precise terms and
more proper terms what I would be able to say. There
is a suspension of the negotiation. We do not really
know when we will come back. So, we are now in
uncharted waters, to a large extent. We may have
the political will, still, I hope, but we are short of
compass. We are short of a road map. For Brazil,
which has bet so much on the multilateral system, I
must say, it is specially sad. Of course, we do not
despair. We will continue to try, will continue to engage
bilaterally, informally, multilaterally, if necessary, but ,
of course, there is a disappointment and a
disappointment that cannot be compensated for by
any kind of bilateral, biregional or other type of
agreement. There is no substitute for the WTO, there
is no substitute for the multilateral trading system when
it comes to disciplines, when it comes to things like
subsidies, when it comes to things like antidumping
and that is why for developing countries specially, but not only for them, the WTO is irreplaceable. So,
I sincerely hope that we will be able to recover, to
put things back where they were, but a lot of effort
will be required, first, not to unravel, and second, to
make further progress.
So, this is the situation today and I am
prepared to take some questions.
(inaudible)
Well, you know, this is like saying that the
legal system should be dismantled because I do not
like a particular law. I am of a different view. I think
we should try to reform the legal system whenever
we don ́t like a particular law. If you dismantle the
legal system, you will be liable to the law of the jungle,
because there is no other way. Trade will continue.
Will it continue with rules or will it continue without
rules? Or with rules imposed unilaterally? So, I do
not think this is really an alternative. I respect those
who have grievances with the multilateral system. So
that we reform it. That is what we are trying to do
here.
Any other?
(inaudible)
I do not have any process in mind at this stage
myself, which does not mean that my colleagues and
advisors may not have a process in mind that they
have not yet submitted to me for lack of time, but
surely, if we are not able to progress, and I have said
that yesterday, actually, on our meeting, or was it
today? I do not remember, but on one of the small
meetings that, surely, trade disputes will continue and
resort to these dispute settlement will become more
frequent.
(inaudible)
I did not make any suggestion of that sort and
certainly if a course like that could be considered,
certainly that would not be now. That would not be
now. So, I do not think this would be safe. This would
be suicidal and I do not recommend anyone to
commit suicide.
(inaudible)
Well, I was trying to reply my friend’s
434
Resenha de Pol. Ext. Brasil, a. 33, n. 99, 2o semestre 2006
question. I did not suggest the Lamy ́s text. I certainly
would not suggest the Lamy ́s text in a situation in
which it does not receive a collective signal that he
might breach a small gap here and there. The way
we are now does not allow that.
(inaudible)
Did I mention the United States? I mentioned
domestic support as an area. So, I mentioned by
implication that is what you mean, but, well, no, I did
not hear everything I wanted to hear. I have to
recognize, though, that there was movement on the
part of the European Union on the last few months to
get closer to the G-20 proposal. I actually said more
in the sense of an assessment than in the sense of a
demand that it would be more likely to have an
agreement if the European Union would move to a
true G-20 proposal, not something that is near to G-
20, but is not exactly G-20. I mean, these proposals
have been presented informally, I do not know how
public they are, but in any case, for instance,
everybody knows that the cuts in the higher bands
by the European Union are much smaller than the
ones proposed by the G-20 and they come to a similar
average by means of different products, which are
not of great interest for many of the participants. So,
I believe that if... and I understand that this would
require further efforts. Maybe revisiting the European
Council, which probably is something that is very
painful, I do not know, but I did say that if we had a
true G-20 proposal I am not sure if that automatically
would bring the United States into the agreement,
but that would be helpful. So, it is not a question of
saying: am I satisfied with what the European Union
did? No, I was satisfied, let us say, I was pleased
with the movement and the general sense, the direction
of the movement, but regarding our own interest, but
also as an assessment of what was needed to
complete the Round and I think it was not sufficient,
but, of course, this is what negotiations are for. And,
of course, if we have a similar move in relation to
domestic support, even if it was insufficient, than we
would be playing the game. (inaudible)
Well, as I said, I do not know if the European
Union made public what they said to us and I try to
respect as much as I can the so called “rules of
engagement” of these negotiations. So, if they have
not made public it would not be me that would make
them public. It suffices to say that they fell short of
what the G-20 is asking. In relation to my forecast to
when this can resume, as I said, I think informal
contacts of one kind of another certainly will take
place. I hope they take place, but I do not believe
that it will be a matter of weeks. It will certainly be a
matter of months and not, maybe, very few months.
Ok, thank you very much.
