DISCURSO DO MINISTRO DAS RELAÇÕES EXTERIORES, MAURO VIEIRA, PO
OCASIÃO DA IV CÚPULA DE SEGURANÇA FÍSICA NUCLEAR (WASHINGTON,
1/04/2016)
Mr. President,
Brazil is committed to several national and
international actions to strengthen the
physical protection of nuclear materials. We
have strong, efficient and appropriate
mechanisms and legislation regarding
physical protection and prevention of
terrorism, as well as strict accountability
and control of nuclear materials and
radioactive sources.
In this regard, all nuclear material in Brazil
is under safeguards of IAEA and ABACC –
the Brazilian-Argentinian Agency of
accountability and control of nuclear
materials. As mentioned in the morning
session by President Macri, of Argentina,
this organization is the result of the strong
cooperation and deep confidence built
between Brazil and Argentina in the nuclear
field, which started 25 years ago.
All rules and regulations pertaining to the
physical protection of sensitive assets,
materials and equipment, according to the
regimes and agreements to which Brazil is a
party, have been incorporated into our
domestic legislation. The 2005 amendment
to the Convention of Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material is currently in the process
of being submitted to the Brazilian National
Congress.
In addition, Brazil has been cooperating
with other countries and the IAEA to
implement nuclear security and physical
protection measures during major public
events. This cooperation gained momentum
during the 2007 Pan-American Games and,
more recently, the 2014 FIFA World Cup.
Such joint efforts will continue to run up to
the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro.
43
A few days ago, on March 16, President
Dilma Rousseff signed into law a bill which
typifies terrorism as a crime and regulates
investigation and judicial proceedings
related to terrorism under domestic criminal
law. Combined with regulation adopted last
October on the freezing of assets belonging
to individuals and entities listed by
multilateral sanctions regimes, the new
legislation
reflects
the
Brazilian
Government's strong commitment to
combat terrorism and terrorism financing.
In the view of the importance of the topic of
this lunch, Mr. President, I'd like to state
that since 2010 Brazil has participated in
the Nuclear Security Summits that you
created. We welcome with satisfaction the
fact that this Summits have contributed to
increasing the visibility of nuclear security
in all of its various aspects.
To be consistent and effective, Brazil
believes that it is essential to consider
nuclear security in the context of broader
efforts to promote goals that are also related
to nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-
proliferation and advancing nuclear energy
for peaceful uses.
Brazil
and
another
15
countries
participating in the Summit will release
a joint statement with the broad view of the
challenges we face in the nuclear arena. The
physical protection of nuclear materials will
not be strengthened if our efforts are only
focused on nuclear materials and facilities
under civilian programs, while ignoring the
threats posed by the large amounts of
material involved in nuclear weapons
programs. 83 percent of fissile materials
that can be used in nuclear weapons around
the world are located in military facilities,
which are not covered by any international oversight
information-sharing
confidence-building mechanism.
or
I would like to refer to the remarks that you,
Mr. President, made in Prague in 2009 in
favor of disarmament, which resulted in a
new start agreement between the United
States and Russia in 2010. Your vision, Mr.
President, is consistent with that of many of
us here today: that it is necessary to
simultaneously and forcefully confront all
risks posed in the nuclear arena. To that
end, we need not only to strengthen the
physical protection of nuclear materials but
also to continue our non-proliferation
efforts and advance towards the
disarmament to achieve a world that is free
of nuclear weapons and any other weapons
of mass destruction.
The Nuclear Summits, initiated in
Washington under your inspiration, have
achieved the goal of focusing international
attention on the various aspects of nuclear
security. Now, we believe it is important to
channel all efforts to the International
Atomic Energy Agency – IAEA, which is
the multilateral institution that counts with
the participation of all actors and has the
legitimacy, mandate and technical expertise
required to follow through with this issue.
Thank you very much.
