“A Pledge to New Interamericanism”

Pronunciamento do Ministro de Estado das Relações
Exteriores, Embaixador Luiz Felipe Lampreia, por ocasião
do almoço oferecido pela “Americas Society”, em
associação com o Conselho das Américas, sobre o tema “A
Pledge to New Interamericanism”, Nova York, 25 de
setembro de 1996

I wish to thank the Americas Society and the
Council of the Americas for this renewed opportunity
to address this distinguished audience.
Institutions such as these have been playing a
central role in the development of Brazilian-American
relations and that is why we cherish them. It is indeed
a pleasure to be here.
I keep saying that this kind of exchange of
views between government, business and the
Academy is necessary and useful for policy planners
and decision makers.
Foreign Ministries can no longer act as an
ivory tower and this is certainly not the case of
Itamaraty.
Policies must reflect the views, the needs and
the sensibility of a broader segment of public opinion,
particularly in a world with a tendency towards
homogeneity based on democracy and economic
freedom, where ideology is no longer the dominant
force. And public opinion means the academic world,
the press, the business community, labor, and, yes,
the consumers, the citizens, who are the ultimate goal
of policy-making in a democratic society.
I have chosen a subject that pertains to the
core of the relations in our Hemisphere and that can
shed light on Brazilian-American relations as well: the
need for a new Interamericanism.
Interamericanism was born and has unfolded
under very specific continental realities and with
particular, though evolving objectives.
It served the purpose of strengthening
hemispheric relations at the beginning of the century and
again during and immediately after World War II.
As a movement, as an initiative, it may look
outdated. As an area for concerted action, it certainly
recalls specific moments or initiatives in our
continent’s history, when it was used as a lever for
specific policies.
As an ideological, vindictive or even
confrontational field of international relations, it certainly
doesn’t serve any purpose in the present day.
But as a framework for advancing hemispheric
relations, the concept of Interamericanism can be
instrumental in promoting development, trade,
investment, technology transfers and wide-ranging
cooperation among the countries of this Hemisphere.
For many years now, and especially since the
election of Secretary-General Baena Soares, the
OAS has undertaken the task of strengthening
democracy and human rights, of consolidating a
confidence-building process in our continent and of
fighting crime and drug-trafficking.
In a way, in the political field, Interamericanism
has already been reformed and enhanced in order to reflect new realities and challenges in our hemisphere.
This is proof that Interamericanism, with the
right perspective, can remain as a powerful force in
regional relations, a catalyst for action, and a necessary
complement to our subregional and national identities.
Our broad geographic circumstance is an
integral part of our definition as peoples and nations
and everything that reinforces that sense of geographic
belonging is useful as a tool in international relations
today more than ever.
Nevertheless, a renewed Interamericanism
should assimilate not only the political trends in our
hemisphere — the commitment to democracy, human
rights and political stability in the region —, but also
the economic trends, namely, economic freedom and
integration and the ways these trends interact with
the different levels of Interamerican relations.
A new Interamericanism should reflect and
positively contribute to the changing realities that our
region will carry on to the next century.
It must reflect and reinforce the logical relation
between our goals in terms of regional integration and
of bilateral policies.
Hemispheric integration, both at subregional
and continental levels, and the quality and complexity
of the bilateral ties in our continent are a key to
understanding what the relations in our hemisphere
have become and where they can go from here.
Both Brazil and the US play a pivotal role in
those three levels of relationship. They are key
countries in their respective subregional groups, the
NAFTA and Mercosul, and thus directly concerned
with their outcomes.
Also, US-Brazilian relations are better now
than they have ever been since the end of World War
II. Indeed, our relations today are certainly more
complex and more respectful than ever, for they
unfold without even a trace of automatic alignments
or subordination and can count on a very affirmative
and constructive spirit — the spirit that governed
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s State visit
to Washington last year.
We need a renewed commitment based on
shared economic interests, on a more open economic
system throughout the Hemisphere, on trade and
integration, as Latin America moves towards more
open economies thanks to sounder adjustment
policies, privatization and monetary stabilization.
Governments of the entire continent are
working on that commitment, not with rhetorical
purpose, but with a clear bearing and tangible
objectives: to enhance the participation of
Interamerican economic relations in expanding foreign
trade, improving domestic production and
employment and increasing competitiveness.
Hemispheric integration aiming at a Free Trade
Area of the Americas, and the upgrading of the
network of bilateral relations in our Continent are the
key to this new Interamericanism.
FTAA talks, now preparing the next concrete
steps of how and when to start the negotiations, the
quality of the network of present bilateral relations
— for example, between Brazil and the US or Brazil
and Argentina —, and the expansion of Mercosul
through free trade agreements with South American
countries, starting with Chile, are new trends and
realities on which we can count to move forward into
that kind of new Interamericanism.
As ideological barriers erode throughout the
world, as democracy and economic freedom become
the pattern in international relations, the international
community moves forward to the consolidation of
universal rules regulating trade and productive
investment, technology flows, nonproliferation and the
enforcement of human rights and environmental
protection.
Countries are more and more conscious that
collective action and solidarity, through free trade
agreements, market integration, an intense
participation in the international decision-making
process and also strong sets of bilateral relationships
are key to approaching global markets and global
issues.
Credentials, such as political and economic stability, economic freedom and openness, full
adherence to universal rules and regulations and wide
credibility, are essential. You either play by the rules
or you don’t play at all.
Countries are aware that they should use a
cautious, realistic approach in tackling the challenges
of this day and age. They must be affirmative in
identifying their objectives, in defining their timetable
for negotiations, in engaging constructively in these
negotiations and in building upon what they are
accomplishing.
This is precisely what we are doing in
following-up the commitments reached at the Miami
Summit of the Americas, a cornerstone of a new
approach towards Hemispheric relations.
All the new elements in the contemporary
world structure are present in this pragmatic exercise
of weaving a new pattern of relations and cooperation
within the Americas.
First of all, developing countries in the region
have moved towards more open and outward-looking
economic policies. Those policies have replaced the
import-substitution policies that had prevailed for
decades as a strategy for development and
industrialization.
Several unilateral concessions or advances
have been made by countries in the region, when they
realized the importance of exposing their economies
to outside competition in order to better respond to
the challenges of quality, cost and productivity.
Several other concessions have been made
by countries such as Brazil as a result of the launching
and consolidation of subregional agreements —
Mercosul, in our own case — and during the Uruguay
round.
Many economies in the region — and this is
certainly our case — are in a process of adapting to
this new reality. They have been challenged and thus
require a certain amount of time in order to become
fully competitive.
Second, we have a global framework for
trade relations under the WTO agreements, with
universal, non-discriminatory rules regulating world
trade and new areas such as intellectual property
rights. WTO provides also for a strong dispute
settlement mechanism that enables countries to deal
on an equal basis with trade differences and conflicts.
Third, several sub-regional initiatives, such
as Mercosul, clearly show that integration has left the
world of rhetoric and policy-planning to become a
strong reality in the day-to-day lives of our countries,
our business communities, our labor unions and
especially our consumers.
Subregional integration is a main force in
increasing international trade. Mercosul countries, for
instance, have more than tripled their subregional trade
in four years, and they accomplished this just as they
doubled their foreign trade as a whole.
Finally, bilateral relations have also gained a
new momentum.
Developing countries account for a
remarkable increase in imports in our region, many
times surpassing the growth in their own exports.
Brazilian-US relations are a show-case of this new
trend.
Once largely favorable to us, our bilateral
trade has grown at the same time as the balance
shifted favorably to US exports. It is important to
notice that this happened as non-tariff barriers to
Brazilian products, affecting significant areas such as
steel products, orange juice, footwear and textiles,
remained as a constraint to the further growth of our
bilateral trade. This is being the object of careful
consideration and straight-forward discussions by the
US and Brazilian governments, which places the entire
issue under a positive light.
As these conditions unfold, Hemispheric
relations gain an unprecedented momentum, as strong
and affirmative as it has ever been since the
inauguration of the Pan-American movement a
century ago.
For this trend to endure, it is important, in our
view, that all countries in the Americas have a farsighted approach to Hemispheric relations. Brazil’s position is consistent and firm in this
regard. We deeply believe that the FTAA talks could
now set the course — the how and when – of the
negotiations, provided these negotiations take into
account three components:
- First, that the subregional arrangements be
consolidated so that they can act as the building blocks
for a larger free trade area in the Americas;
- Second, that any further opening of our
economy takes into account our ability to adapt the
productive sector in order to allow for competition
on an approximately equal footing with more
developed economies in the hemisphere. We should
also be allowed to strengthen our defenses against
unfair trade practices and our safeguards system
under WTO rules; and
- Third, that concessions in terms of lower
tariffs within the process are fully reciprocated with
broader access to other markets in the region and
the removal of protectionist measures.
In our view, this approach will ensure that the
three levels of interaction among our countries will
weave a new pattern of relationship in our region,
one based in sound realities and strongly shared
interests.
This new pattern of relationship, based on
mutual respect, confidence and a long term vision of
common interests, has already begun to make the
dreams and ideals of the founding-fathers of InterAmericanism come true.
As History unfolds in our Hemisphere, let us
follow this path. Let us leave to future generations of
this Continent the legacy of a new Inter-Americanism
that is based on confidence, respect and a strong
sense of regional community in a challenging world.
Thank you.