“Egypt is the key to the Middle East and its
role is crucial in drawing a new world political
map” - Entrevista concedida pelo Ministro das
Relações Exteriores, Embaixador Celso
Amorim, ao jornal “Al Aharam” do Egito, em
10 de abril de 2005
BRAZIL’S FOREIGN MINISTER INTERVIEWED BY
IBRAHIM NAFEI
FRONT PAGE
The Contribution of the Arabs to
Contemporary Civilizations Entitles Them to a
Permanent Seat on the Security Council.
Celso Amorim, Minister of Foreign Relations of
Brazil emphasized that Egypt is the key to the Middle
East and its role is crucial in drawing a new world political
map to achieve international equilibrium.
Amorim said – in an interview in his office at the
Brazilian Ministry of Foreign Relations with Ibrahim
Nafei, Chairman and Editor-in-Chief of Al Ahram –it is
important that the Arab world obtains a permanent seat
in the Security Council. The Arab contribution in shaping
the contemporary civilizations entitles them to it.
The Brazilian Minister emphasized the
necessity of establishing peace in the Middle East.
He said: There will be no peace in the world if peace
is not achieved in the Middle East.
He assured that the South American countries
do not hesitate in endorsing the establishment of an
independent Palestine state on the basis of the pre 1967
borders. He pointed out to the necessity of expending
efforts to ensure the participation of all classes of the
Iraqi people in the governing institutions, with the support
of the United Nations and the Arab countries.
INSIDE PAGE
THERE IS NO HESITATION IN THE
ENDORSEMENT OF SOUTH AMERICAN COUNTRIES
TO ESTABLISHNG AN INDEPENDENT PALESTINIAN
STATE WITHIN ITS 1967 BORDERS.
THE ARAB-SOUTH AMERICAN SUMMIT IS A
LAUNCHING PAD FOR COOPERATION. THERE ARE NO
438
DISAGREEMENTS IN THE VIEWS RELATED TO
JERUSALEM AND THE LEGITIMACY OF RESISTENCE.
Interview in Brasília by Ibrahim Nafei
Celso Amorim, Brazil’s Foreign Minister
assured that because Egypt is the key to the Middle
East, it has an important crucial role in drawing a new
world political map able to accomplish international
equilibrium. If peace is not achieved in the Middle
East, then there will be no peace in the world. He
emphasized that the Arab world has a role in shaping
contemporary cultures and civilizations. He added that
it is imperative that the Arab world obtains a
permanent seat in the Security Council.
He pointed out that the infrastructure of the
United Nations took its shape from the realities
following the 2nd World War in 1945. The situation
requires reform. Amorim vehemently denied the
existence of any Arab disagreement with South
American countries in relation to the issues laid down
in the final declaration expected to be issued by the
Summit of the two groups of countries scheduled in
Brasília on the 1oth and 11th of next May. He said
that the Ministerial Meeting in Marrakech on the 24th
and 25th of last March had witnessed an
understanding on a lot of issues. Amorim pointed out
that what is left are slight divergences regarding the
ideal wording for the presented issues, in addition to
one point which is yet to be settled. This concerns
the establishment of a follow-up mechanism of the
Summit’s outcome. He emphasized that the Summit
is the beginning of a constant operation to consecrate
interests and cooperation between the two regions.
It is a launching pad not just an arrival station. He
further stressed that there is no hesitation on the part
of the South American Countries in supporting the
establishment of an independent Palestinian state on
the basis of the pre 1967 borders.
Regarding Iraq, he stressed the necessity to
expend efforts to ensure the participation of all classes
of the Iraqi people in the governing institutions. He called for a bigger participation on the part of the
U.N. and the Arab countries in these efforts.
Following is the text of the interview:
Nafei: During the Marrakech preparatory
meetings for the Arab-South American Summit there
have been differences in the suggested drafts
presented by the Arab and South American sides
regarding the text of the final declaration. Two issues
had emerged: while both drafts confirmed the right of
the Palestinian people to an independent state, the
Arab draft, alone, stressed that Jerusalem is that
state’s capital? Also the paragraph related to
condemnation of terrorism, the Arab draft
differentiates between terrorism and legitimate
resistance to foreign occupation. This was missing in
the South American draft. Have these differences been
settled or will they be referred to the Summit to reach
an understanding?
Amorim: Understanding has been achieved
on all these matters in Marrakech. These were not
disagreements really, just disparities as to the most
suitable wording and the extent of detail involved.
The only point which remains open relates to a follow-
up mechanism for the Summit’s outcome. There had
been two suggestions but, frankly, none of them was
suitable. It turned out that the matter had not been
given much thought prior to Marrakech. This had been
among the issues I discussed with Arab League’s
Secretary General, Amre Moussa during his visit to
Brasília last week in preparation for the Ministerial
meeting which will immediately precede the Summit
next May. Otherwise all other matters have been
settled. There are no problems in this regard.
I wish to say that the final declaration is not
the Summit’s goal. The great importance of the
Summit lies in the continuous operation that will be
launched, it has, in fact, been already launched. It is
in the consecrating the interest of both regions in each
other. He Summit is a launching pad not just a final
destination. It is understood that the participants will
each hold to a language they have previously used in
the U.N. and other for a. But these important
disparities are the issue. This, in my opinion, is much
more important than particular signals here and there.
I think the meeting in Marrakech was very beneficial
it was characterized with a high degree of openness
and mutual understanding.
Nafei: Brazil like several world countries
including Egypt has strongly objected to aggression
on Iraq. However, this has gone through and
consequently Iraq was occupied. What is your
evaluation of the situation in Iraq today and what
should be done to help the Iraqi people to attain their
aspirations in democracy, independence and peace?
Amorim: You are completely right. Brazil
objected vehemently to the war on Iraq. We believed
that other solutions could be reverted to. I met with
the Arab Ambassadors in Brasília prior to the
incursion. President Lula da Silva wrote to the U.N.
Secretary General, Kofi Anan suggesting several ideas
to reach a peaceful solution to the crisis. Of course
we were not lenient regarding the behaviour of
Saddam Hussein’s government but we believed that
the matter could be solved in a different way based
on respect to the Security Council and by peaceful
means. After the war President Lula da Silva wrote
to the late Pope (Jean Paul II) who had a lot of ideas
on achieving conciliation after the war including some
kind of international summit.
None of these succeeded and matters went
the way we all know how. Today we cannot claim
that we possess a magic formula to solve Iraq’s
predicament. We know it is a very difficult matter
with deep historical roots. Thus, we are for reaching
a solution that safeguards the safety and unity of Iraq
based on the highest degree of democratic
participation for all classes of the Iraqi people. We
believe that the elections represented a positive step
but we also believe that more efforts should be
expended to ensure the participation of all the people’s
classes in the governing institutions. Nevertheless, I
emphasize that we do not possess a magic formula. I
believe that what we can offer Iraq, while it is stepping
forward, is a greater participation by the United Nations and the regional countries. Of course there
are different views and approaches but we believe
that it is extremely important for the regional countries
to have a bigger role. They possess a better
understanding of the situation in Iraq.
Nafie: Let us go back, once more, to the
Palestinian issue. Most world countries, including
South American countries support the right of the
Palestinian people for self determination and an
independent state. Nevertheless, the actions of
Sharon’s government such as settlements enlargement
and continuing the construction of the apartheid wall,
is creating new realities on the ground which may
make the goal of an independent state impossible to
be achieved. How do you explain the hesitance of
some South American countries in explicitly
condemning such actions?
Amorim: I am unable to elaborate on this
matter in relation to final declaration of the forthcoming
summit. Theoretically, at least, it will not be
announced except after being presented to the leaders
and meeting with their final approval. I may, however,
say that of course it includes an explicit and conclusive
support for the right of the Palestinian people to
independence. There is no hesitation whatsoever in
supporting a Palestinian state established on basis of
the pre 1967 borders.
I wish to emphasize that this is a declaration
issued by a highly important summit. I imagine that
our thoughts in this regard are for the long run.
Therefore, I do not believe that it is among the
Summit’s tasks to comment on detailed realities unless
a significant event occurs beforehand and imposes
itself on it. I may recall, in this regard, my speech in
front of the Arab Summit in Algeria and I am thankful
for the Algerian government’s invitation. I clearly said
that we support an economically viable independent
Palestinian state, consequently not partitioned in
segregated zones and it should be a country where
human dignity is respected.
When we speak about human dignity, it is
meaningful. I went to Palestine, for the first time, during
440
my last visit to the region. I know what it means to
maintain human dignity. What a difference when you
read about something and when you see it with your
own eyes. On the other hand, we also support the
existence and security of all other countries in the
region. Therefore, there is no doubt about our support
for a viable Palestinian state. We have also, in fact,
condemned the expansion of settlements.
Nafei: The quadripartite summit of Puerto
Ordaz in Venezuela (with the participation of Brazil,
Venezuela, Colombia and Spain) called for a new
geopolitical map of the world based on multi parties
and multi pivots. Emphasizing a commitment to
international law and striving to democratize the world
order, especially the United Nations. How do you
view the current structure of the international political
system, and how do you think you can implement the
alternative vision laid down in Puerto Ordaz?
Amorim: The answer to your question requires
complete minutes about the United Nations. What you
raised presents considerably complicated issues.
However, I believe that now, especially after the
Secretary-General’s report and the high level
committee’s report, we are contemplating a propitious
opportunity to effect some changes. It won’t be a
revolution (in the U.N. system), but there must be reform
of the United Nations whose basic structure reflected
the realities following World War II in 1945; among which,
of course, the security Council and the necessity of
admitting new permanent members especially from the
developing countries. Brazil, as you are aware, is a
probable candidate to permanent membership of an
enlarged Council, as well as other countries.
I believe that it would be more than logical
for the Arab world to obtain a permanent seat in the
Security Council. The question we must strive o
answer relates to the existence of some kind of
resistance with regard to the total number of an
enlarged council. I, however, believe, it is possible.
There is no big difference if the Council is composed
of 24 or 25 members, but 30 members, for example,
is a different matter. I think we can reach a formula that ensures a good representation for Africa and other
developing countries in general, in South America,
Asia and also the Arab world.
However, we should not restrict the reform
of the U.N. just to the enlargement of the Security
Council. There should be more mandatory power for
the General Assembly. This, in my view, rests upon
the political will of the member countries and not just
structural reforms. However, there is a need for
structural reforms in particular domains. We have
proceeded to move in this direction, through the joint
meetings between the Security Council and the UN
Economic and Social Council, for example. When
you face a situation related to reconstruction you are
confronted with a vacuum from the angle of the UN
agencies able to deal with it. It is not, strictly speaking,
a matter for the Security Council. Also the Economic
and Social Council is not qualified to handle it on the
other hand. This point, in our view, is extremely important
to ensure a multilateral approach to the subject.
For example the issue may gather special
importance for Palestine in the future. It is definitely
also important in our region in a case such as Haiti.
Let me tell that when the Venezuelan
President, Hugo Chavez called for a new geopolitical
map of the world he mentioned that he is quoting
from the speech I delivered during the preparatory
meeting for the Arab-South American Summit, in
Marrakech.
Nafei: What is your view on the role of the
Arab world in general and Egypt in particular in
drawing such a new map for the international order?
Amorim: I believe that the Arab world is an
integral part of this new geopolitical map. This view
has led President Lula to call for the Arab-South
American Summit. Some say why don’t we make it
a Summit for Africa and Latin America. O.K. this
may also be done. But we viewed the necessity for
the meeting to have a practical effectiveness. We want
to start a real cooperation between the Arab and
South American regions. To gather Africa and Latin
America including the Caribbean, then we are speaking
about 80 countries or something similar to the non-aligned
movement for example. This is a good thing but is totally
different from what we require from a meeting between
Arab and South American countries.
Therefore, our call for this meeting with Arab
countries stresses the importance we lay upon it. I
believe we are, in reality, talking about a bridge
between east and west, which is a matter of crucial
importance. On the other hand, historically the Arab
world has played a vital role in shaping the
contemporary cultures and civilizations. A third reality
is that without peace in the Middle East there will be
no peace in the world. Thus, I believe that all these
elements confirm the vital role of the Arab world in
drawing this new geopolitical map of the world.
Egypt, no doubt, is the key to this region and has an
extremely vital role.
Nafei: What are your expectations as to the
role that can be played by the Arab League to
consolidate Arab-South American relations?
Amorim: In Marrakech, we were extremely
pleased to find out that the Arab League is also
seriously thinking of reforming and strengthening itself.
We are doing the same thing in South America. We
strive to form an agglomeration of South American
countries. There are also other ideas being discussed
in this organizational frame. Maybe we can benefit,
in this regard, from the ideas laid down in relation to
the Arab League.
On the whole, we might well know that
President Lula was the first South American President
to visit the Arab League, and I believe I was the first
non Arab official invited to attend an Arab summit. I
wish to emphasize the extremely important role played
by the Arab League in all phases of preparation for
the anticipated summit. I personally went three times
to the Arab League, notwithstanding the last time
dedicated to the Arab-South American Summit; Amre
Moussa has also, personally, played an extremely
important role in helping us to clarify the objectives
and goals underlying our call for the summit.
What incites attention is that, today, no one asks why this summit. The question now is why wasn’t
it convened before?
Nafei: The World Social Forum of Porto
Alegre has indeed played a role in building some
bridges between the civic community in both the Arab
world and South America. Is it expected that the
Arab-South American Summit will play a role in laying
down more bridges at the civic communities’ level in
both regions?
Amorim: I don’t recall now if there was a
direct signal to the civic community in the proposed
final declaration of the summit. But I believe that there
are elements in the summit’s objectives which include
bridge building between the civic communities in both
regions. We are keen, for example, on cooperation
in science and technology, and in the cultural field.
An Arab cinema festival, the first of its kind in South
America, will be held parallel to the summit. This
inclination to deeply know each other opens wide
avenues for encounters between the civic
communities in both regions.
Businessmen are also part of the civic
community. However, let me lay down a few figures
to clarify what I mean by saying that the summit has
already succeeded before being convened. Last year,
alone, Brazil’s trade with the Arab world has increased
50%. We are not speaking about a limited volume of
trade, but about a volume of trade of about US$ 8.5
billion between Brazil and the Arab countries. In some
cases there was no trade exchange of consequence,
such as with Syria and Jordan. Here the rate of
increase was 180%. Even with our traditional partners,
there was a considerable increase in trade exchange.
The rate of increase in our imports from Arab countries
was higher than our exports. The former increased
by 54% while the latter grew by about 46%.
Generally speaking there is a kind of equilibrium in
our trade balance with the Arab countries taken as a
whole. It might differ with regard to particular
countries. For example, we have a large surplus with
Egypt and a large deficit with Algeria.
I believe the civic society has an important
442
role to play in this operation. However, we have no
right in directing the civic society. It is up to them to
decide what they should do. No doubt, however, the
meeting of leaderships will incite the interest of public
opinion and media on both sides. This should induce
a change in ideas and knowledge of each other. This
change is already occurring.
Nafei: A large number of Brazilian citizens
estimated at 10 million are from Arab descent. The
same, more or less, applies to most South American
countries. Do you view a special role for them in
laying down bridges between their current nation and
the original ones?
Amorim: Mr. Amre Moussa has met with the
group of Arab descendants in the Brazilian Congress.
He also visited the Arab communities in São Paulo.
This, in my opinion, is an indication of the interest
among the communities of Arab descent in Brazil and
South America to participate in this operation. I trust
that they will play an active role in the businessmen
forum concurrent to the Summit. It was necessary
that initiative comes from the President but I imagine
that, in future, these communities will demand from
us more and far reaching steps.
Some are speaking about a civilization dialogue
and others are speaking about a coalition of civilizations.
Personally I do not like these expressions. I do not believe
that we belong to different civilizations, but to one
civilization. This is especially true in the case of the Arab
world and South America. If you look, for instance, at
the Portuguese or Spanish languages you will find a lot
of Arab words and expressions. Notwithstanding the
deep influence of Arab philosophical thought on the
western philosophy. All this is known, but in any case
whether we are one civilization or different ones,
whatever is said about dialogue and coalition is already
tangibly happening between us.
Of course we all know that religion constitutes
an important element in every civilization or cultural
structure but we did not wish to center the dialogue
on religion or language or any such thing. We
preferred to start with having a dialogue with the Arab world and not all the Islamic world for instance.
Nafei: Relations between Egypt and Brazil
are relatively old. The first visit of a Brazilian leader
to Egypt was in 1867 by Emperor Pedro II. More
than one and a half century elapsed before the visit of
Brazilian leader tom Egypt. The second visit was the
one, recently, done by President Lula. Should we
expect that this last visit be the precursor for stronger,
more vital and recurrent relations?
Amorim: Let me first say that a century and
half will not have elapsed before several other visits
to Egypt by Brazilian leaders. As you know, however,
President Lula visited five Arab countries as well as
the Arab League. I am confident that he wishes to
visit other Arab countries in the future. As for myself
I am almost competing with Bin Batista. I visited most
Arab countries more than once. There are maybe
five or six Arab countries I have not yet visited. N
one trip I visited ten Arab countries. I had not visited
Algeria before but within three weeks time I visited it
twice. Also Amre Mousa’s visit is the first for an Arab
League Secretary General to Brazil.
I believe that we are confronting a continuous
and developing operation. We are rediscovering each
other. I am hearing that a second Arab-South
American Summit is being thought of, although I am
unable to confirm this now.
