Reunião do Movimento dos Não-Alinhados
Discurso do Ministro de Estado das Relações Exteriores,
Embaixador Celso Amorim, por ocasião da Reunião do
Movimento dos Não-Alinhados (17 de setembro de 2006)
(versão em inglês)
Transcreve-se, a seguir, discurso do Ministro
de Estado das Relações Exteriores, Embaixador
Celso Amorim, proferido ontem, dia 16 de setembro,
na XIV Conferência de Cúpula do Movimento dos
Países Não-Alinhados:
Señor Presidente Raúl Castro, Presidente en
ejercicio del Consejo de Estado de la Republica de
Cuba y Presidente de la 14a Cumbre del Movimiento
de los No-Alineados,
Excelencias,
Distinguidos Delegados,
Señoras y Señores,
I am honoured to take part in this 14th Summit
of the Non-Aligned Movement in the wonderful city
of Havana.
I am grateful for the warm and friendly
welcome I have received since my arrival from the
Cuban authorities.
Let me express, on behalf of President Lula
and the Brazilian people, our best wishes for a quick
recovery to President Fidel Castro.
In the last few decades, there has been much
talk among economists about a twin deficit. It refers
of course to the situation of internal and external
accounts.
I wish today to allude to another twin deficit
that the world faces and that affects very much
countries represented here: the twin deficit of
democracy and development in the present
international order.
Since its foundation, the Non-Aligned
Movement has been advancing the aspirations and
claims of developing countries in a spirit of dialogue
and tolerance. Brazil has been supportive of these
efforts and has coordinated closely with its members.
Non-Alignment has been an indispensable
force for upholding multilateralism.
Brazil stands firm on its defense of established
notions that have guided the attitudes of the Non-
Aligned Movement, such as non-interference in
domestic affairs and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. In particular, we condemn every form of
unilateral action, like embargoes and sanctions, let
alone the use of force not authorized by the Security
Council.
Increased interdependence calls for enhanced
solidarity among nations. This is especially needed in
the case of many places in Africa, where men, women
and children are doomed to a life of poverty and despair.
Thus, President Lula has become an advocate
for what we describe as an attitude of ‘non-
indifference’.
In September 2004, President Lula, along with
his Chilean, French, German and Spanish counterparts
– and with the support of the UN Secretary-General –
, launched the ‘Action against Hunger and Poverty’, an
initiative that brought together more than fifty Heads of
State and Government.
Our objective was to create an effective
partnership to mobilize international support for
financing development through innovative mechanisms.
This goal is becoming a reality. Next Tuesday,
President Lula – together with other leaders – will
announce the official creation of the International Drug
Purchase Facility to combat the three diseases that
most seriously affect developing countries: HIV-
AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis.
Mr. Chairman,
In the WTO, Brazil has joined forces with
other poor countries to ensure that the Doha
Development Agenda is true to its name.
As mentioned in the Statement adopted in the
High Level Meeting of the G-20, held in Rio de
Janeiro last weekend: ‘The livelihood and standards
of living of the world’s poor are seriously jeopardized
by the subsidies and market access barriers prevailing
in international agricultural trade. Any round that
would be faithful to its development dimension must
urgently redress this situation’.
The challenges of our global society call for
enlightened leadership. South-South cooperation, as
supported by NAM and other groups such as the G-
15, is an essential element of the path towards these
solutions.
The Summit which just took place in Brasilia
with India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA, as we call
it), involving three large democracies, one from each
continent, opens new possibilities for South-South
initiatives. The same goes for our relentless efforts
towards South American and Latin American
integration.
Mr. Chairman,
In the field of peace and security, inadequate
responses undertaken outside the UN Charter present
us with the urgent task of reforming our institutions.
Let us heed the words by UN Secretary-General Kofi
132
Resenha de Pol. Ext. Brasil, a. 33, n. 99, 2o semestre 2006
Annan before this Conference: the narrow power
base of the Security Council’s composition carries
the risk of a progressive erosion of its authority and
legitimacy. We fully agree when he speaks of a
‘democracy deficit’.
Threats posed by terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction can only be successfully confronted
with the democratization of the decision-making
process within the UN system.
Following the establishment of the Human
Rights Council and the Peace-Building Commission,
the time has come to address the reform of the
Security Council, with the expansion of the number
of its members in both categories.
In Lebanon, I have witnessed the tragic effects
of disproportionate use of force to solve problems
which call for enduring political solutions.
The Palestinian people continues to face acute
hardship, as the prospects for a peace settlement and
a viable Palestinian State remain elusive.
In our region, Haiti has become a test case
for peace-building through a UN-mandated collective
effort. But we will need sustained international
engagement to achieve lasting results.
The challenges we face require solidarity and
a renewed capacity for dialogue.
We reject the view of an international order
which favours the use of force and regards
multilateralism as just one among many options in the
menu, to be picked when it suits the objectives of the
powerful. Our vision of peace presupposes social
justice, democratic procedures and respect for
international law.
We will continue to work closely with the
Non-Aligned Movement to transform this shared
vision into reality.
Thank you.
