Abertura da 51ª AssembléiaGeral das Nações Unidas

Pronunciamento do Ministro de Estado das Relações
Exteriores, Embaixador Luiz Felipe Lampreia, na sessão
de abertura da 51ª Assembléia-Geral das Nações Unidas,
Nova York, 23 de setembro de 1996


Mr. President,
Accept my congratulations on your election
as President of the fifty-first session of the General
Assembly.
The Brazilian delegation is confident that under
your leadership this body will find new strength in the
pursuit of the principles and purposes of our Charter.
I also wish to pay tribute to my dear friend,
Professor Diogo Freitas do Amaral, for the dedication
with which he conducted the historic fiftieth session.
We are grateful for his steadfast commitment to ensure
that our work was consistent with the high
expectations of the fiftieth anniversary celebration.
My delegation extends a word of gratitude
and recognition to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali, for the perseverance he has shown in
carrying out his tasks.
Mr. President,
For the first time Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde,
Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal and São
Tomé and Principe come to the General Assembly
as members of the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries, a body dedicated to cooperation
and political coordination.
The Member States of the Community intend
to consult and to work closely together at the United
Nations, with a view to better promoting their common
interests and fostering their linguistic, cultural and
historical identity.
The MERCOSUL countries have also come
to the General Assembly with an enhanced sense of
unity.
MERCOSUL gives living and concrete
expression to economic integration and open
regionalism and represents one of the creative forces
at work in the Americas.
It is a new and striking feature of our
continent’s identity and a reflection of democracy and
the commitment to economic reform in our region.
With the customs union firmly in place, Chile
has now joined MERCOSUL as an associated State,
by means of a free trade agreement with far-reaching
political and diplomatic implications.
Bolivia will also shortly associate itself with
MERCOSUL. We look forward to other countries
of the region joining as well, to further bolster the
dynamic and open nature of MERCOSUL.
Now firmly rooted, in the process of
expanding, and acting as an important partner of a
growing number of countries and regional groups,
MERCOSUL is a positive response by South
American countries to the challenges and opportunities
of today’s world.
Achievements such as MERCOSUL and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries enhance the credentials of their members and help to
make of their presence in the world an instrument for
economic development and social progress.
Mr. President,
My country comes to this General Assembly
proud to present itself before the international
community with a stronger presence in the world.
Brazil owes this to the consolidation of its
democracy, to economic stabilization and liberalization
and to the resumption of economic growth with a
deeper sense of social justice.
It owes this as well to its participation in
regional integration and in the globalization of the
world economy.
We are in tune with the two main forces that
are shaping the world today: political and economic
freedom on the one hand, and cooperation through
integration and trade on the other.
I am pleased to say that, through decided
action, rather than words, we have made genuine
strides in enlarging our dialogue and cooperation with
friendly nations worldwide, developed and
developing alike.
We have strengthened traditional partnerships
and established new ones, especially in Africa, Asia
and the Middle East.
We are aware that, if the Brazilian people are
to consolidate these achievements, we will need to
persevere in the policies that have brought us this far.
We know these policies have yet to meet
many challenges Brazil faces in the social, economic
and cultural fields.
But they are an important beginning.
We are convinced that Brazil’s growing
interaction with its region and the world, the
consolidation of its international partnerships and a
fruitful dialogue and cooperation with its many friends
are necessary conditions for our country to continue
to pursue its policies at the domestic level.
Brazil is one of the world’s largest
democracies, a dynamic and diversified developing
economy, an attractive opportunity for productive
foreign investment and a market of huge potential - in
a word, a country capable of enjoying fruitful ties with
all nations on the basis of mutual respect and
reciprocity.
By its very nature, Brazil can act as a bridge
between the many different worlds which conform
its own internal reality.
Our aspirations to enlarge the scope of our
participation in the international decision-making bodies
will always reflect a careful assessment of our own merits,
of our own specific weight and of the contribution that
we can bring to the community of Nations.
We seek to be a force for peace and
integration.
Mr. President,
The fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations
understandably raised the expectations of the
international community.
Expectations that we would not only dwell
on the past and on the many achievements of the
Organization, but also look to the future, in search of
ways for it to come to grips with new realities and
problems.
We can confidently say that the celebration
of the fiftieth anniversary produced good results.
As world public opinion was focused on the
UN, leaders and governments were compelled to
reflect on the Organization and to make room for it in
their political agendas.
The historic meaning of the San Francisco
Charter was recalled, as was the UN’s importance
as a forum for political debate and as a sounding board
for conflicting interests in the post-war era.
Our collective reflection clearly revealed that,
without the UN, the world would only have been
more violent, more unstable and insecure, more unjust
and cruel, especially to the weak — a prey to power
politics and to arbitrary decisions.
We celebrated great advances in international
law and in the political and ethical commitment to issues of concern to humanity — issues such as
sustainable development, protection of the
environment, respect for human rights, disarmament,
non-proliferation and the fight against poverty,
terrorism, organized crime and drug trafficking.
We have thus made a positive account of the
first fifty years of the United Nations.
Mr. President,
We cannot say with the same confidence that
the fiftieth anniversary has ushered in a renewed
commitment to the UN and its future.
Our efforts have fallen well short of the
expectations of the international community. They
have been disappointing even in light of the predictions
of some of the most cautious analysts.
A stalemate persists, an uncomfortable
stalemate that leads to a feeling of uncertainty and
frustration, of insecurity about the future of the United
Nations, and thus of apprehension.
In the wake of momentous changes in the
international scene, the United Nations has embarked
upon a new phase in its history without the means
and the effectiveness to act as the highest political
forum of mankind and to fulfill the mandate conferred
upon it by the international community — a mandate
which remains as valid today as it was a halfcentury
ago.
Back in 1961, President John F. Kennedy
referred to the UN as “our last, best hope”.
In the face of the threat of nuclear war and in
the midst of various conflicts, those words expressed
the confidence of the international community in an
Organization founded on the universal purposes of
peace, understanding and prosperity for all peoples.
President Kennedy renewed then a pledge
to the United Nations, (quote) “our pledge of support
— to prevent it from becoming merely a forum for
invective — to strengthen its shield of the new and
the weak — and to enlarge the area in which its writ
may run” (unquote).
Twenty-five years after these inspired words,
the United Nations finds itself at a crossroads.
The world has changed, the correlation of
forces has changed and so have the hopes and
expectations of countries in regard to the United
Nations and its capacity to manage, prevent and settle
conflicts.
Yet various confrontations still cause suffering,
instability and misery throughout the world.
This is happening just as the Organization
faces the worst financial and motivational crisis in its
history.
There is a widespread feeling of
dissatisfaction, sometimes veiled and sometimes
explicit, with an organization which still embodies the
loftiest ideals ever conceived by the human spirit in
the search for peace and understanding among
peoples.
Mr. President,
Brazil is committed to the UN Charter and to
the Organization’s political, legal and diplomatic legacy
of the past fifty years.
That commitment is part of the diplomatic
history of Brazil and of the principles which have
always governed our actions in this body and in our
relations with all peoples, particularly with our ten
neighbors, with which we have lived in peace for well
over a century.
Compelled by that commitment, we sound a
word of caution to all those who, like ourselves, wish
to see the United Nations as a source of leadership
in international relations, as an instrument for
promoting an international society based on freedom,
the rule of law and the rights of the citizen.
With the political and ideological constraints
of the Cold War behind us, the world is now organized
around much more concrete and pragmatic variables,
such as international trade, investment flows and the
transfer of technology.
The emphasis on political and ideological
coalitions has given way to an emphasis on economic
coalitions. Pressured by public opinion, governments
today are concerned with social well-being, the quality
of life, economic and social indicators, unemployment.
The focal point of the political debate is shifting
irrevocably from strategy and ideology to economics
and integration.
This is why the world is following the path of
large-scale regional economic agreements.
North-South and East-West, the main axes
of international politics in the last fifty years, have given
way to groups of countries dedicated to the goals of
economic integration and the coordination of
macroeconomic, financial and trade policies.
North, South, East and West are no longer
the cardinal points on the international political
compass. The WTO and its body of universal rules
and regulations for fostering free trade, the European
Union, APEC, NAFTA, the OECD, the Group of 7,
ASEAN, SADC and MERCOSUL have become,
in their respective areas of action, the catalysts for
development, cooperation, understanding and, yes,
for peace.
The peace that the founders of the United
Nations envisioned might come about as a response
of the various regions and groups of countries to the
challenges, opportunities and risks of a new world,
today called the world of globalization.
A world which generates prosperity and a
healthy competition among countries and regions.
But a world which also swells the ranks of
the destitute and the outcast among and within
countries.
A world which breeds conflict and increases
inequality.
A world which demands reason, reflection and
constructive action.
Mr. President,
Through peace, cooperation, respect for
human rights and development, the UN has a major
role to play in preventing that the divisions of the Cold
War find new expression in a widening gap in
wellbeing.
The Organization must evolve in order to
successfully play that role as it has so often done in
the past.
It must adapt its structure and methods of
work, in order to optimize its human, material and
financial resources.
It must make use of the great political,
strategic, and moral power it is able to muster.
It must implement and follow up on its
decisions, on the rules with which it updates and
consolidates international law and on the
commitments it has won from the international
community.
Much remains to be done in the wake of the
great conferences which have shaped the international
agenda in the present decade.
The conferences on the rights of the child,
environment and development, human rights,
population and development, social development,
women and human settlements have sealed
commitments that must be honored, decisions which
must be implemented and followup work which must
be carried out.
The UN must ensure that its agenda becomes
more appealing and result-oriented, in order to earn
the esteem of the public and to retain its priority in
international relations.
We must correct the tendency to convene
meetings whose only result is to produce other
meetings or to adopt resolutions of a rhetorical nature.
We must rid the UN of its image as a morose
and lethargic body incapable of rising to the challenges
of our times.
Brazil is convinced that UN reform remains
within reach, that it is still possible to ensure that the
UN will play a paramount role in this new phase of
its existence.
We believe in reform as a means to ensure
that the UN becomes a viable and logical alternative
to unilateralism or power politics.
We believe in reform as a means to empower the UN to act in a radically changed world.
We believe in reform as a mean to restore the
UN’s role as a unique forum for political and
diplomatic action and debate.
Mr. President,
One year after our Heads of State and
Government drew attention to the seriousness of the
financial situation of the UN, a solution to the problem
remains elusive.
To stifle the UN little by little by depriving it
of the means to perform its functions is no way to
secure greater administrative efficiency.
Should this scenario persist, then the capacity
of the UN to adapt to the dynamics of the
contemporary world could be seriously jeopardized.
We could very well witness a situation where
other bodies come to occupy the space left by the
UN, bodies with their own goals and agendas, which
may or may not reflect the prevailing sentiments of
the international community and the interests of world
peace, security and stability.
That is why we need perseverance, courage
and, above all, the political will to advance the
discussion on issues which reflect a true commitment
to the United Nations.
Issues which relate to the very relevance of
the Organization for international relations on the eve
of the twenty-first century.
Issues such as reform of the Security Council.
There is a virtual consensus that the Security
Council should be enlarged to allow for greater
participation by countries with the capacity to act on
a global scale and the willingness to bear the
responsibilities it would entail.
We must now set a course for this process.
Its outcome is essential for strengthening the United
Nations.
Mr. President,
Brazil has made several commitments in the
field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery
systems.
We are now committed to having the Southern
Hemisphere recognized as an area free of nuclear
weapons.
It is our firm belief that this is a right to which
the peoples of the Southern Hemisphere are entitled
and an obligation on the part of those throughout the
world who possess nuclear weapons or the means
to develop them.
A further commitment to disarmament in all
fields that I wish to convey to this Assembly is the
decision by the Brazilian Government to declare a
moratorium on the export of anti-personnel land
mines.
The experience of the Brazilian contingent
serving in the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission has underlined for us the importance of a
universal moratorium of this kind and the need to rid
the world of the scourge of land mines, which pose a
threat to the daily lives of millions of human beings.
We would like to see all countries that export
land mines or that have the capability to do so join us
in this decision.
Mr. President,
The international community has set its hopes
on a Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty.
These hopes are fully justified.
We have a historic opportunity to put an end
to an outdated practice which has increasingly drawn
repudiation and condemnation from international
public opinion.
We are taking an important step towards
general and complete nuclear disarmament and stating
unequivocally that there is no room in today’s world
for nuclear weapons or regional arms races.
Brazil is committed to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and to the elimination
of nuclear arsenals. It has consistently expressed its
disapproval of nuclear tests.
Brazil strove for approval of the CTBT at the Conference on Disarmament and considered the
blocking of consensus in Geneva a grave setback.
It was inconceivable for Brazil that we could
have let the moment pass, that we could have run the
risk of seeing the CTBT meet the same fate of so
many other initiatives which were allowed to lapse
into oblivion.
This is why Brazil was one of the first to cosponsor the Australian initiative to seize the historic
opportunity of submitting the CTBT for approval by
the General Assembly.
This decision reflected the commitment to
bequeath to present and future generations a safer
world, free of nuclear weapons.
This is why Brazil will immediately sign the
CTBT.
We call upon all nuclear and non-nuclear
weapon States to do the same.
Mr. President,
The peoples of the world expect action and
leadership from the United Nations.
They expect that the UN will continue to be
an essential benchmark of international politics over
the next fifty years.
That the UN will always be not the last, but
our best hope.
Thank you.