DISCURSO DO MINISTRO DAS RELAÇÕES EXTERIORES, MAURO VIEIRA, POR
OCASIÃO DA CONFERÊNCIA INTERNACIONAL DE APOIO À SÍRIA E REGIÃO
(LONDRES, 04/02/2016)
First of all, allow me to congratulate the
Governments of the United Kingdom,
Germany, Norway and Kuwait, as well as
the United Nations, on the organization of
this timely and important conference. The numbers resulting from the conflict in
Syria are well known to all of us: a death
toll too great to be overlooked and a
humanitarian drama that has turned far too
many average Syrian citizens into victims
for the international community to ignore.
Not to mention an entire generation of
Syrian children and youth left out without
an education, deprived of aspirations and
dreams. This is a human tragedy of epic
proportions, one that affects all of
humanity. That is why I hereby announce that Brazil is
channeling over 1.3 million dollars to the
Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees with the
purpose of alleviating the plight and the
suffering of Syrian refugees in the
neighboring countries and elsewhere.
Furthermore, Brazil has purchased 1.85
million dollars' worth of food supplies –
roughly 4.500 tons of rice – which will
hopefully help improve food security for
refugees and internally displaced people in
the Levant. In spite of the fiscal and
budgetary adjustment my Government is
currently carrying out, Brazil sees
humanitarian assistance to those in need as
a responsibility we cannot shy away from. Helping those suffering from war, terrorism
and chaos is one side of the coin. The other
one is giving shelter to those trying to run
away from such ordeal. Brazil’s
humanitarian visa policy, which was
extended for two additional years last
September, has allowed for more than 2,000 people affected by the conflict in Syria to
seek refuge in Brazil since 2013. Another
7,000 of such visas have already been
issued, allowing those who have applied for
it to safely arrive at Brazilian shores. As the home of the largest Syrian diaspora
in the world, a land that has offered safe
haven for people fleeing the Levant for over
a century now, a country that has been
shaped by the contribution of immigrants
and their descendants, including over 4
million Brazilians of Syrian ascent, Brazil
has opened its arms to receive those fleeing
from the conflict in Syria and from the
threat of terrorism. Ladies and gentlemen, Our efforts today will have limited impact
if a meaningful political solution is not
reached soon enough. Last December, for
the very first time since the beginning of the
conflict in Syria five years ago, the UN
Security Council formally acknowledged
that there cannot be a military solution for
the Syrian crisis. Brazil has long advocated
that a political solution is the only road
there is. We welcome Resolution 2254 and
encourage all key stakeholders to follow the
roadmap outlined therein. We also welcome
Resolution 2258 and urge concerned actors
to comply with international humanitarian
law and to provide safe, full and unimpeded
access to humanitarian agencies on the
ground. The international community must be
prepared to fully support the mediation
efforts led by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan di
Mistura, and to further encourage the intra-
Syrian dialogue, in spite of the many
obstacles and shortcomings it faces. Helping Syrians to broker a political
solution;
stemming
the
bloodshed;
alleviating the hardship caused by war;
keeping Syria united; fighting and
preventing terrorism; rebuilding a country
torn-apart: these are the tasks ahead.
Daunting for sure, but unavoidable. You
must rest assured that Brazil will shoulder
its share of responsibility for carrying out
the momentous collective endeavor that lies
ahead of us.
Thank you very much.
