
Uma nova fase nas relações Brasil-Jordânia
(The Jordan Times, 03/03/2018) [Inglês] 

After a six-year hiatus in high-level
reciprocal visits, I am pleased to arrive
in Jordan with the aspiration to open a
new phase in our bilateral relations.
Politically, our relations have always
been excellent. Despite our
geographical distance, Brazil and
Jordan share common positions in
multilateral fora, as well as in the most
important global issues. It is time to
strengthen our relationship in other
areas, such as economic and technical
cooperation fields.
Brazil considers Jordan a beacon of
stability and moderation in a region
surrounded by conflicts. This is an
important role that we also try to play in
our own region.
We follow attentively Jordanian
positions regarding important issues in
the Middle East, particularly the
Palestinian plight for an independent
state, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Moreover, we admire His Majesty King
Abdullah’s leadership in the global fight
against terror and extremism.
We also acknowledge and praise the
Jordanian government and people for its
generousity in historically hosting such
a large number of refugees, being
Palestinians, Iraqis, Syrians and from many other nationalities. Brazil is aware
that no country is immune to the
consequences associated with large
movements of refugees, and believes
that only a coordinated response can
ameliorate the suffering. Rather than
closing borders, as some governments
have done, the international community
must work together to address the issue
of global displacement. In this context,
let me stress the importance of the visit
to Brasilia, on February 19 and 20, of
the High Commissioner of the United
Nations for Refugees, Filippo Grandi,
when we reiterated our common goal of
assisting refugees to the best of our
capacities.
This represents another similarity that
brings our countries close together.
Brazil is open to immigrants and hosts
nowadays more than 12 million Arab
descendants. Our current president,
Michel Temer, is from Lebanese
descent. The Arab influence in the
formation of our national character is
significant in all realms of society, in
areas such as the arts, the architecture
and the cuisine.
Today, I will sign with Foreign Minister
Ayman Safadi a bilateral Agreement on
Technical Cooperation, an important
tool to create new possibilities of cooperation, for instance, in the fields of
agriculture and industrial development.
Besides, we are negotiating a new
model of investment protection
agreement, which is highly important to
foster our bilateral economic relations
and could entice Brazilian investors to
use Jordan as a hub to access the
regional market.
Trade between our countries has been
reasonable, but still below its full
potential. In the last decade, the bilateral
trade flow was around $230 million per
year, with a huge surplus on the
Brazilian side. However, since 2013,
Jordanian exports to Brazil have
increased consistently, but still below
$10 million per year.
Our relations are also being
strengthened on the fields of defence,
security and intelligence, particularly
after the visit of the Brazilian minister
of defence to Jordan in December 2017.
Next year, we will celebrate 70 years of
the establishment of diplomatic
relations, a very important landmark in
our relationship. I hope my visit will
contribute to promote and strengthen
the solid and excellent ties between our
countries. *The writer is the Brazilian minister of
foreign affairs. He contributed this
article to The Jordan Times
