Entrevista concedida pelo Ministro das
Relações Exteriores, Embaixador Celso
Amorim, ao programa de rádio “The
Interview” da BBC ( Davos, Suíça, 23 de
fevereiro de 2007)
Now on the BBC World Service, time for
The Interview:
Lyse Doucet - Hello and welcome, I’m
Lyse Doucet. My guest today wants to put his
country, Brazil, on the map. Not just that, he wants
to turn our map of the world upside-down, so that
developing nations in the South come out on top,
in trade, in social progress and in political clout.
But does Latin America’s largest nation have the
biggest voice in its region and around the world?
Celso Amorim, the Foreign Minister of Brazil,
welcome to The Interview.
Celso Amorim – My pleasure.
Lyse Doucet – Let’s start with maps. The
map that you are said to have on the wall behind
the desk in your office. It’s an inverted map with
the South on the top. (Celso Amorim – Well...) Is
that the map that guides you as a foreign minister?
Celso Amorim – Well, it is a good
conversation piece, anyway. And I’m sure you
could also claim that all the other maps are
inverted. That map was originally drawn in the
beginning of the XVI Century and a tapestry was
made out copying it, not in my administration,
that happened thirty or forty years ago, but I think
it is a very good map, also because you see Africa
in the center and all of us have to pay a lot of
attention to Africa.
Lyse Doucet – But you want the world to
pay a lot of attention to Brazil?
Celso Amorim – I think the world has always paid some attention to Brazil not always
to the good side, sometimes to some good sides
like football, or things like that, but I think also
Brazil has a role to play. It is a positive role, we
are a peaceful country, I mean, we have given a
big contribution to world peace. We have ten
neighbors, that’s not usual, very few countries
have as many neighbors as that, and we haven’t
had a war for more than 150 years. So it starts
with that. We have a multiracial society, with its
problems, we know that, but of course, very rich
in its diversity, and... So I think we can give a
contribution, we’re a large economy, well, we have
a large population....
Lyse Doucet – When you became Foreign
Minister in 2003, for the second time, you spoke
in your acceptance speech of the national mood,
saying that in contrast when you’d been foreign
minister before in the 90’s there hadn’t been, what
you called, a self-awareness in Brazil. Conditions,
you said, in the 90’s weren’t right for Brazil to
play a big role. What did you mean by self-
awareness?
Celso Amorim – Well, maybe I meant self-
esteem more than self-awareness, I don’t
remember exactly what I said, but that is what I
meant. And I think Brazil had, well we had a long
period of military government, as you know,
which surely affected our self-esteem. When we
got out of the military government, soon
afterwards, the first president that was elected was
impeached, on grounds of corruption. Then we
had the government which I served too, which
was, I think a very honest, good government, but
it was really a transition government, so there was
not the kind of...., we had a very high inflation,
which actually started to go down precisely in that
government, and I don’t think the Brazilian
democracy had been truly proved. And when
President Lula was elected, a man coming from
the working class, that had a political and a social
agenda, I think that gave a lot of self-esteem to
Brazil, and they say: that’s possible, we can elect
548
a working class man who is an important leader,
who has charisma, who knows what he wants for
Brazil, and we are not ashamed of the fact that he
doesn’t speak English, for instance!
Lyse Doucet – Well, it’s useful to speak
English but not essential! But so much self-
esteem, now, so much pride in yourself, that you
believe Brazil should have a seat on the UN
Security Council? The top table?
Celso Amorim – Well, you know, this is
an old story actually, that began even before the
self-esteem that I referred to, because when the
Second World War was coming to a close, even
President Roosevelt thought that Brazil should be
in the Security Council to insure a better balance
between the different regions of the world, I
believe, and being one of the countries that fought
the war, also. But I think now, more and more it’s
clear that you can’t have a legitimate Security
Council which takes decisions that affect
everybody’s life, could be composed only of those
countries that were the bigger powers then.
Developing countries must be there, India must
be there, an African country must be there, and I
think a South American country or a Latin
American country must be there. And the name
of Brazil occurs naturally, not only to us, but to
many other people, including Prime Minister
Blair, who referred to it sometimes, including
President Chirac who referred to it sometimes,
including the leaders of many of our neighbors.
Lyse Doucet – After President Lula’s
election victory in October, you told the press that
Brazil has decided to look increasingly towards
South America, your own region. So of all the
stages Brazil plays on, your region is the most
important?
Celso Amorim – Yes, I would say so. And
it’s natural. I mean, I’ve already referred to the
fact that we have ten neighbors, I mean, neighbors
with borders, apart from that two countries that
are very near, like Ecuador and Chile, and it is a
region which needs to integrate itself. When you look at the world today, and you see that big blocks
vying for power, or economic power, the United
States is a block in itself, China is a block in itself,
the European Union is a block that keeps growing.
I think South America would be an important
block, but that needs a lot of effort. It’s a daily
work. It’s not something that you just write a
beautiful declaration, or treaty, and then it happens.
It’s not like that.
Lyse Doucet – Let’s look at the vying for
power within your own region. How worried are
you that Brazil’s voice is being eclipsed by Hugo
Chavez? He speaks more loudly, much more
controversially, and has a lot of oil money to spend
on his neighbors.
Celso Amorim – President Chavez is a
good friend of ours. So I won’t say anything that
would contradict this basic fact, but well, when
you speak more loudly maybe you are immediately
more heard, but, I don’t know, History will tell
whose voice will have a greater impact in the
region. And, by the way, I think many of the things
that he says are very, in a way, coherent with the
social situation that he found in Venezuela which
is a country that needs a lot of reform and change,
but we have our own way.
Lyse Doucet –What is it like when you sit
down and talk to him? You’ve had meetings with
Hugo Chavez?
Celso Amorim – Yes, many.
Lyse Doucet – Does he use the colorful
language when he talks one-on-one that he uses
in the press? When the head of the Organization
of American States, José Miguel Insulza, criticized
Hugo Chavez’s moves against the press saying it
looked like an apparent censorship, Hugo Chavez
hit back and called him an imperial viceroy and,
if you excuse the expression, “an asshole from a
to e”. What does he talk like at the table?
Celso Amorim – Well, he never referred
to the Secretary General in those terms to us. (Lyse
Doucet – Well, that is what he said to the press.)
The colorful language ...he is a man who has read
quite a lot also, and he makes many metaphors,
which makes conversation interesting. As you
know, President Lula has been very much attacked
by the Brazilian press but he was always absolutely
respectful of the Brazilian press, so there is no
doubt about our position in that case. And,
actually, we expressed in the Organization of
American States our respect for Secretary General
Insulza.
Lyse Doucet – Of course, you’re the
Foreign Minister, so you are being very
diplomatic. So let me call from a former Brazilian
Foreign Minister, Felipe Lampreia. (Celso
Amorim – yes...) He said it was a big mistake to
let Venezuela join your regional economic block,
Mercosur, because he said “Chavez wants to
control it, and is President Lula’s biggest rival.”
He says, “Lula is moderate and pragmatic. Chavez
is revolutionary, socialist, an international agitator
who sees himself as the leader of Latin America”.
Celso Amorim – Well..., Lampreia is of
course now in opposition. He is a good person,
he is a good friend of mine, but, you know, when
I spoke about self-esteem, an aspect of that is also
self-confidence. When Venezuela joins Mercosur
actually it’s more likely that Brazil will influence
Venezuela than the other way around. We are the
most powerful economy, we are the biggest
country, we have institutions that have been
proven already by History. We respect President
Chavez’s choice, I should say the Venezuelan
peoples’ choice, because President Chavez was
elected once and again and faced a referendum,
and so on. I think President Chavez on the whole
makes a positive contribution, because of his
concern with social matters. Of course sometimes
he gets a bit too enthusiastic and we have to try to
moderate him. It has happened in our discussions,
let us be frank... (Lyse Doucet – He listens?) yes,
in our discussions, yes, about Mercosur, and about
... I have a story about President Chavez, I don’t
know if we have time to go through that but
President Chavez was thinking in the beginning that getting into Mercosur was just signing a piece
of paper, or expressing some rhetorical will or
something like that. I talked to him and I told him
a story of a Greek king who wished to learn
geometry and asked who was the best geometer
and someone said it was Euclides. And he called
Euclides and said: I want to learn geometry, but I
don’t want to go through all those books. And
Euclides said: well, there is no royal way to
geometry. President Chavez laughed and very,
very soon he revealed that he learned and said:
“you know I learned my geometry already”. So
he listens.
Lyse Doucet – Now, as you know outside
the region they are casting a whole red shadow
across Latin America saying that one after another
left leaning governments are coming to power.
Sitting in the region is that how it looks to you?
Celso Amorim – I think that’s true for
Latin America in general, but I would like to speak
more of South America. The backlog of social
injustice is immense. Even our own country has
one of the worst records in terms of income
distribution in the world. The same goes for
Venezuela, the same goes for many other
countries. I don’t want to mention one by one, for
Bolivia, for instance. So it is natural that leaders
that are concerned with these social injustices
come to power. In the case of Brazil, it was a leader
who came democratically, who has a democratic
program, and who will implement it in a
democratic way, with debate, with discussion, as
he just re-emphasized the other day when he
launched his growth program, and he said that it
is useless to grow without democracy. So...that’s
our way, but we don’t want to export our model,
but if we can preach by example, that’s fine.
Lyse Doucet – How much does it worry
you that the United States seems to be worried
about a lot of the left leaning countries coming to
power in your region?
Celso Amorim – I don’t think they should
worry about left leaning countries. I think they
550
should worry, and all of us should worry, if there
are dictatorial regimes, non-elected governments,
military governments, as there existed in the past.
We want our region to be democratic, we want
our region to deal with the social problems that
we have, and we want our region to have a good
dialogue with the United States, and if we can
help in that direction, and we have helped a little
bit in the past, in some cases, I think we should.
Lyse Doucet – When they get on the phone
to you, if Condoleeza Rice calls you up and says:
what are we going to do about Hugo Chavez, he’s
got a war of words with us and perhaps more?
Celso Amorim - Well, let us see what we
can do to improve that relation. Actually in the
past when there was, for instance, this recall
referendum in Venezuela, that was not time of
Condi Rice, it was Colin Powell, but I was
sometimes twice a day on the phone, but I think
in a climate of mutual respect, that’s the essential
thing. No one gives orders, no one receives orders,
we have dialogue.
Lyse Doucet – You’re listening to Brazil’s
top diplomat, the Foreign Minister of Brazil, Celso
Amorim, speaking to me, Lyse Doucet, on The
Interview, on the BBC World Service. Of course
you also talk about activism in your foreign policy,
and you saw that in practice when shortly after
President Lula came to power, and you became
his foreign minister, he took his cabinet on a trip
to the Northeast, where he was born, and he said
he wanted you to see the poorest regions of the
country, to look misery in the eye. You had come
from the majestic surroundings of London as
Ambassador in London, how did that trip affect
you?
Celso Amorim – Ah, well, I think it was a
very good trip and a very educational trip, because
I could see the people maybe from a distance that
I had not seen so closely before, in the same way.
And I think to see the poor conditions in states of
the Northeast of Brazil, makes clear to you what
you have to represent. It’s fine that we represent the business class and the business interests, that’s
part of our job, but we also have to represent these
downtrodden people, these hungry people who
want to be heard. So I think for a foreign minister
it is very important to have that. I am very glad
that President Lula took me, not only to this trip,
but that was the first one.
Lyse Doucet – Because you were quoted
to saying at the time that you’d only seen this in
the movies, this sort of poverty.
Celso Amorim – Not normally, I would
say, yes. (Lyse Doucet interrupts – What marked
you the most?) You don’t feel same way. Well, I
must say, in this trip there are two things that
marked me. One was the poverty itself, I mean,
you had places where there was not a bridge to
cross and the city was divided and you had to go
by boat from one place to another, but what also
impressed me very much, struck me very much,
was the hope. The hope the people had on
President Lula, that he would change things. And
that probably caused even a greater impression
than the poverty itself, because the hope is even
more difficult to see in films.
Lyse Doucet – Because poverty must have
been stark, Brazil at that time had one of the most
unequal income distributions of the world.
Celso Amorim – And it still has, I mean,
we have improved.
Lyse Doucet – You get like conditions we
have in Spain and Subsaharan Africa in your own
country?
Celso Amorim – Yes, I would say so, yes,
it’s true. That is why President Lula gives so much
attention to the social aspect. So, you know, I’m
very glad that I can work for a government that is
so much committed to social reform but at the
same time respects all the tenets of democracy.
Lyse Doucet – Is that why when you got
the call to become foreign minister you said yes?
Celso Amorim – Yes, well, I think that, as
I said, having President Lula as a President (Lyse
Doucet interrupts – that made the difference) that
made the diff....
Lyse Doucet interrupts – What was it the
day, were you in London when you got the call
that he would like you to be part of his team?
Celso Amorim – Well, I got a call that he
would like to interview me, he didn’t say
interview, but he would like to have a talk to me.
Then we had two conversations. The first
conversation he said, “well, come back here in
three days from now”. And I came back three days
later, still with many ideas on my head, trying to
maybe impress him, I don’t know, and in the
middle of the conversation he just interrupted me
and said: I want to invite you to be the Foreign
Minister. It was very moving, because ...
Lyse Doucet – You accepted?
Celso Amorim – I accepted immediately,
yes.
Lyse Doucet – Is he your friend as well as
your boss?
Celso Amorim – I would say so, yes, ...
yes, yes. Yes, I would say so.
Lyse Doucet – And the fact that he had
this charisma, this extraordinary story of being
going from a shoeshine boy and a metal worker
to the highest office of Brazil, was that an asset
for you as the Foreign Minister, it gave you a more
audacious foreign policy because he had this
mandate for social change and he talked about it
not for just Brazil, but for the whole world?
Celso Amorim – I think his personality
has a lot to do with the audacity, as you call it, of
our foreign policy. I think he, well, for instance,
you mentioned the map. And the expression that
once he used when we were discussing agreements
with the Arab world, with Africa and China he
said: “well, we have to change the world economic
geography”. So that’s his expression, not my
expression. So it’s a pleasure actually serving to
him. He is a very intelligent man, too. I mean, it’s
obvious by the fact of his history, but, I mean ...
If he doesn’t want something to be done, he says
clearly, there is no way, no need to try to guess what he will think. It’s a very clear, very direct,
very frank, very friendly relation.
Lyse Doucet – But now when some of the
shine has gone off Lula, we saw in the recent
election that there had to be a second round of
voting, that must have been a bit of a shock, that
people are asking now if he let some of his
supporters down, are you still this enthusiastic
about being his Foreign Minister?
Celso Amorim – Well, it may sound
strange but I feel even more enthusiastic, because
I think we can see with more maturity what we
have done and what we need still to do. And I
think President Lula has this very clear view also.
So, I think it’s there, of course sometimes you feel
tired, physically, because, you know, you have so
many things to do, but then you think what else
would I be doing, that would be as interesting,
and, at least in my view, as good to my country, to
the people to which I belong?
Lyse Doucet – To someone that believes
in it all so much, in the whole project if you like,
was it disappointing for you when a government
which came in promising a clean government was
then bogged down in a corruption scandal?
Celso Amorim – I think it was for all of
us, a very difficult moment of tension, also for
President Lula, one thing I (Lyse Doucet interrupts
– And for you?) well, (Lyse Doucet continues –
the whole cash for votes scandal in the
Parliament?) Well, it’s not nice to have these
things happening, but one thing that was really
very important is that we had a clear view, and I
always had the conviction that President Lula was
not involved in any of those things.
Lyse Doucet – As the President he
should’ve known about them? And it was his
party, (Celso Amorim – Well...) the Workers
Party, it dragged ..., it was a shadow over the
workers party as well.
Celso Amorim – Well, I don’t want to
justify anything that happened. I think that some
of it was already, in a way had a political, some of
552
them paid the political price already, they were
deprived of mandates, and others will be probably,
[they] will still be tried by Justice, I don’t know,
so these will run its course. There is no doubt there
were mistakes, there were no doubts they were
wrongdoing, but I don’t think that these affect the
center of the Government, and the essence of
President Lula, and that’s also the view of the
Brazilian people. And that’s why he was elected
with such a big majority in the second round, more
than 60% of the vote, which in Brazil means what,
almost 60 million votes, so it’s quite a lot of people
that think that way.
Lyse Doucet – Well you, your agenda, your
job in Brazil, as Foreign Minister there, it also
means you spend a lot of time also on trade, and
Brazil was instrumental in launching what’s
known as the Group of 20, the G-20, the middle
income countries which includes powerful
regional players Brazil, China, India. It caused
quite a stir at the time because it was the voice of
the South speaking up against the G-8 of
industrialized nations. How did it feel to you in
Brazil?
Celso Amorim – First of all, it’s not only
middle income countries, we had also very poor
countries, like Tanzania, which is one of the least
developed countries. I think we had to stand up
and say: “well...guys, these agreements may be
good for you, but not for us”. It paid to have the
courage, of course, we got an article by my good
friend now Bob Zoellick, but at the time we had
those fights. (Lyse Doucet – The US trade
negotiator?) Yes. In which he wrote for the
Financial Times he divided the world between the
countries that want to help and those who are
unhelpful. And the name of Brazil appeared five
times in the article! I found it quite a record. (Lyse
Doucet – As unhelpful?) Of course. But then, some
months later he called me: Celso, maybe we can
have a talk and we can join also Pascal Lamy,
who was then European Commissioner with the
Indians. So that is how we restarted the whole thing. And, of course, now we are restarting it
again. That is the fate of all this round of trade
negotiations.
Lyse Doucet – Now, you laughed now with
a very big smile about what Robert Zoellick said
about you, but at the time, if he said that in public,
he probably said even worse in private, that must
have made you angry?
Celso Amorim – Well, there is something,
there is a national anger, there is a political anger
and there is personal anger. I try never to be
personally angry, but sometimes I have to be
nationally angry or politically angry. But we
always discussed everything with respect, and
that’s why we were able to make progress. You
spoke about the Round and I don’t want to dwell
on that very much, but if this Round succeeds,
which I hope it will, we have achieved an
enormous amount of things. And that was to a
large extent, not only, I would say, but to a large
extent due to the work of the G-20.
Lyse Doucet – You talk about respect, but
a few years ago you talked about, in a speech,
about the embarrassment of developing nations
having to sit at the table and claim fair treatment.
What does it feel like in those, we only get
glimpses when they have the opening pictures of
these long tables, all the world’s representatives
there, developing and developed nations, is it
embarrassing?
Celso Amorim – It feels bad. It feels bad,
and I am very glad to look back and see how much
we changed and the fact that we are not only
invited to the tables of negotiation, but also even
to the panels that are shown to the world. Not
because ... I don’t think that out of any kind of
vanity or superficial pride, but I think it’s because
it’s really important for the world, it’s for Brazil
certainly, but it’s also for the world.
Lyse Doucet – When you say it feels bad,
what is it, do you feel like a beggar, asking for
something that you feel is your due?
Celso Amorim – No, I never felt like a
beggar, I must say because I never beg, but (Lyse
Doucet interrupts – How do you feel bad? What
does it mean, you sit there in your suit and feel
bad?) Well, you are embarrassed, you have
sometimes to leave the room, or you have to...,
but you know you do that but not to much avail in
reality. You feel double-crossed, you feel ill-
treated, maybe that has to do with the way, I myself
and my country, I would say, behaved. I never felt
humiliated, because I never let it arrive at that
stage. I saw other people doing, with much richer
countries, things I would never do. I’ll never do.
(Lyse Doucet interrupts – Like what?) Well, like
being told: you don’t repeat that, or whatever. I
would just leave the room.
Lyse Doucet – Is that Celso Amorim’s
tactic in negotiation, every negotiator has that ...
Celso Amorim – Well, that’s not tactic.
So that is what I said ..., what I mentioned about
national, or if you call civic anger or political
anger. You have to show it, because if you don’t
respect yourself no one will. And that’s true for
persons and that’s true for countries.
Lyse Doucet – But you’ve pointed out
often in these talks that this particular Round, the
Doha talks, which have gone on since 2001, the
difference in these is that actually the interest of
the developing world are meant to be addressed,
to redress the trade imbalances. The essence of
the deal is that developed countries like the
European Union and the US want greater access
to your markets for their industrial products, in
exchange you want them to reduce, or even
eliminate, some of the farm subsidies, is that the
trade off?
Celso Amorim – Well, (Lyse Doucet
interrupts – roughly speaking?) yes, roughly
speaking, yes, but you put it in the reverse order
because the priority, this is after all the
development ground, so they should do the biggest
gesture and we will do something. The main
contribution has to come from the richer countries.
Also because what we are asking from them is not only tariffs, is to eliminate the biggest
distortion that may exist, which is the subsidies,
which makes trade totally unfair. I mean, we heard,
for instance, a dramatic speech by the Foreign
Minister, or the Trade Minister of Benin, because
they produce cotton and their people just die
because of the subsidies. So it is very nice to give
aid on the one hand, and take away with the
subsidies on the other. So, this is the main thing,
but we will pay back, but the big gesture has to
come from the rich guys.
Lyse Doucet – If you were a betting man,
what are the chances of a deal 50-50?
Celso Amorim – No, I would say more. I
would say 70 or 80 to 20. Because I think Prime
Minister Tony Blair said it would be a catastrophe
if we don’t finish. I think it would be a scandal,
actually. Because we are not so far away. You
know, we are speaking of a couple billion dollars
here, well, if you think of the Millennium Goals,
that it thinks that 50 billion dollars should be
disbursed each year, this is peanuts. And it will
have much more lasting benefits.
Lyse Doucet – When you come to
gatherings like the World Economic Forum in
Davos, do you have a real sense that Brazil as a
nation has arrived, it matters on the world stage
now?
Celso Amorim – Well, if I say yes it will
sound too presumptuous, but (Lyse Doucet
interrupts – If you say no I’ll be disappointed.)
yeah, yeah, no, I think so. And when I see President
Lula speaking even more so. But even when I’m
there, and I speak, when Brazil speaks, whoever
is there, by the way, there is silence in the room.
Lyse Doucet – Celso Amorim, thank you
for talking to us on The Interview on the BBC
World Service.
Celso Amorim – It was a pleasure.
Lyse Doucet – Brazil’s Foreign Minister,
Celso Amorim, was talking to Lyse Doucet, the
producer was Anette Mackenzie. If would you like
to tell us your views on the program, you can either
554
write a letter to The Interview, BBC World
Service, Bush House, London, WC2B 4PH or if
you have Internet access the e-mail address is
theinterview ( that’s all one word) @bbc.co.uk or
you can go to bbcworldservice.com and select The
Interview from the drop down program menu. This
is the BBC.
