“Fuel for Thought”
Artigo do Presidente da República, Luiz Inácio
Lula da Silva, publicado no jornal “The Wall
Street Journal”, Estados Unidos, 14 de julho de
2006 (versão em inglês)
Opinion: Fuel for Thought
By LUIZ INACIO LULA DA SILVA
The sharp rise in international oil prices,
political instability in producing regions and the
environmental impact of fossil fuels have combined
to evoke a growing interest in alternative energy
sources. In this context, the Brazilian experience with
ethanol fuel has been a noteworthy success story over
the last 30 years. And the success is now expanding
to biodiesel and H-Bio. I expect that our experience
will be of interest during the G-8 summit in St.
Petersburg.
With the continual increases in oil prices,
ethanol has become even more important for our
country. We now add at least 20% ethanol to all
gasoline sold in Brazil. In addition, E100 fuel (i.e.,
pure ethanol) is sold at all of the more than 30,000
service stations. Annual production is in the range of
four billion gallons, of which around 690 million
gallons are exported. Ethanol accounts for about 40%
of the fuel consumed by passenger vehicles. The
introduction of “flex-fuel” cars in 2003 was an
extraordinary success: Today roughly 80% of all new
cars sold in Brazil can be fueled with any mixture of
ethanol and gasoline, or simply pure ethanol.
Moreover, Brazil has just achieved oil self-
400
Resenha de Pol. Ext. Brasil, a. 33, n. 99, 2o semestre 2006
sufficiency. Here, ethanol has played a decisive role,
along with increased oil production. Since the 1970s,
ethanol has replaced about 800 million barrels of oil,
the equivalent of almost two years of current Brazilian
oil production.
Naturally, we are well aware that ethanol is
not the only solution to oil supply problems. But,
surely, it can become a key part of the solution. A
substantial increase in ethanol consumption may even
extend the timeframe of the world”s oil supplies,
postponing the date when the reserves run out.
Last November, I was greatly pleased to host
George W. Bush in Brasília. During his visit, we were
able to speak at length about our respective
experiences with ethanol. Brazil and the U.S. together
account for about 70% of world”s ethanol
production. I am delighted to see that President Bush
has actively promoted expansion of U.S. ethanol
production and consumption.
Both Brazil and the U.S. have a lot to gain if
we can work together to promote a global market
for ethanol, with other countries involved in its
production, especially in Latin America and in Africa.
In poor countries, production of ethanol and biodiesel
can have an extremely positive impact. It assists in
dealing with the energy deficit, influencing internal
consumption and exports. It can also generate a vast
number of jobs, redistributing the population more
harmoniously between urban and rural areas.
Although Brazil is often seen as a model in
the ethanol sector, it does not wish to achieve a
dominant global position, nor would that even be
feasible. Actually, it is important we have as many
countries as possible producing ethanol. Otherwise
it will be difficult to achieve our goal of creating a
global market, with ethanol being traded as any other
commodity. In this spirit, Brazil is proposing the
creation of a forum gathering the most significant
ethanol producer and consumer countries.
Brazil and the U.S., for their part, can already
begin to work toward shared goals with regard to
technical and regulatory frameworks, research cooperation and the support of ethanol production
and consumption in other countries. Expanding the
international ethanol market will benefit both Brazilian
and U.S. producers.
Naturally, Brazil hopes to see the day when
the secondary tariff on U.S. ethanol imports (now 54
cents per gallon) is eliminated, as that would foster
the goal of globalization of the ethanol market and
enhance bilateral trade. Nevertheless, the goal of an
ethanol partnership stands on its own merits and
should be pursued regardless of any such bilateral
trade considerations. As the world”s ethanol
consumption increases, the primary challenge will not
be to compete for markets, but rather to expand
ethanol production quickly enough to meet surging
demand. Everyone has a lot to gain.
Mr. da Silva is President of Brazil
——————————————————
O mesmo artigo foi publicado no jornal The
Scotsman, no dia 15/07/2006.
