remarks at tHe fifteentH meetinG of tHe CariBBean
CounCil for foreiGn and Community relations (CofCor)
(ParamariBo, 04/05/2012)
04/05/2012

(original em inglês)
Let me begin by thanking you all for the
privilege of taking part in this meeting today.
I bring you a renewed message of my
Government’s commitment to long-term
partnership with the Caribbean region.
On February 2011, I had the honor to
participate as a special guest at the 22nd
Inter-Sessional Meeting of the Heads of
Government of CARICOM, in Grenada.
Since then, more than a year has gone by,
and I welcome this opportunity to meet again
with CARICOM.
We have maintained high levels in trade
between Brazil and CARICOM, with an
overall total of over US$ 4.5 billion in 2011.
encouraged though we are by fgures such
as this, we recognize the imbalanced nature
of our current trade relationship. Brazil has
committed to fnding ways to mitigate this
circumstance. A study was carried out in 2011
on “Opportunities for CARICOM Exports to
the Brazilian Market”. An English version of
the study, which identifes Caribbean products
with a potential to expand exports to Brazil,
will soon be released.
In the same spirit, we have been working
to improve air connections between the
remarks at tHe fifteentH meetinG of tHe CariBBean
CounCil for foreiGn and Community relations (CofCor)
(ParamariBo, 04/05/2012)
04/05/2012
Caribbean and Brazil. There is already a direct
ﬂight between São Paulo and Barbados, which
continues to have a very positive impact on
tourism and on overall commercial – as well
as human – relations within the region. Air
connections are crucial for effective regional
integration.
Since the ﬂight to Barbados was introduced,
nearly two years ago, new possibilities and
demands have appeared. We have invited
the Inter-American Development Bank and
CARICOM to send a team of experts to Brazil
to devise a legal framework that will allow for
“open skies” between Brazil and CARICOM
countries.
Ladies and gentlemen, dear friends,
Despite the strong economic turbulence in
the world economy, we have also been able to
move forward in our cooperation initiatives.
While we in Brazil have been compelled
to make diffcult budgetary decisions, the core
of what we can share with the Caribbean has
been preserved.
The experience we can pass on through
technical cooperation initiatives is sure to
contribute to the tackling of several important
issues in the region.
In the past 12 months, Brazil and  CARICOM have deepened their cooperation,
mainly in the agricultural sector.
in this period, ten specifc actions have been
implemented in personnel training involving
all countries of the Caribbean Community,
always under the coordination and funding
of the Brazilian Cooperation Agency, known
as “ABC” (its acronym in Portuguese). 88
experts from every one of the 14 CARICOM
countries have benefted from this effort, with
an important multiplying effect.
In the context of our continued cooperation,
I wish to thank the representative of Trinidad
and Tobago for his Government’s disposition
to host, on behalf of CARICOM, a modelfarm to be implemented by EMBRAPA – the
Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation
–, with the fnancial support of the Brazilian
Cooperation Agency. Soon, a team of
EMBRAPA experts will head to Port of Spain
on a mission to take stock of conditions and
evaluate costs so as to plan future action.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Brazil believes in applying internationally
the same set of values we uphold in our
own national experience. We have built a
democratic society that is structurally mindful
of human rights. We work to promote growth
in our economy without leaving behind those
who are in a less favorable situation. On
the contrary, we have learned, in practice,
that social inclusion, besides being a moral
imperative, is also sound economic policy, in
so far as it creates powerful domestic markets.
While focusing on our own remaining
internal challenges – which we do not
underestimate –, we are also highly concerned
with the issue of food security worldwide.
This is why we placed much effort in
electing Dr. José Graziano da Silva to the
position of Director General of the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization –
and I thank all of you, once again, for your
valuable support. We need a FAO that is fully
apt to promote food security and to mobilize
the most adequate resources to combat hunger
in the world.
At the same time, Brazil has been
developing policies and practices to face
the food security challenge – policies and
practices we are ready to continue to share in
the form of international cooperation.
We have learned from experience that
improving and promoting small scale farming
is key.
As a result of our “Family Agriculture”
policies, as we call them, today 80% of what
Brazilians eat come from small scale farms.
This achievement was made possible in
a decade. We have implemented a program
in which the Government seeks to stimulate
the so-called “weak linkages” of the foodproducing sector.
The realization that such progress is
actually viable is particularly relevant when
many nations, including Caribbean ones, are
highly dependant on food imports.
The good news is that Brazilian programs in
this area are compatible with Caribbean reality.
They have been conceived to strengthen food
security from a small-scale approach, as they
are based on the idea of promoting production
in municipal communities, integrating all
partners in sustainable cycles that involve
small farms, local schools, hospitals and the
private sector in the community area, such as
hotels.
Through technical cooperation in these
felds, our aim is to help Governments increase
food production and enhance food security.
To fulfll this objective, Brazil is ready to
offer CARICOM countries know-how and
its best practices in areas such as genetic
treatment on a variety of species, cultivation
methods, irrigation and yielding technology
as well as training in farming equipment, animal husbandry and their sub-products,
among others.
Furthermore, there are also important
social policies directed to form and organize
cooperatives in a way that small farmers may
add value to their production without bulky
investments or high-end technology.
The Brazilian Ministry of Social
Development, as well as that of Agrarian
Development, will be ready to provide, over
the next months, specifc courses in Brazil
for CARICOM representatives in order to
share with you, whenever there is interest, our
policies and the experience we have acquired
in this critical area.
More broadly, we will be offering in
Brazil, starting august 27th, a fve-day course
for foreign Government offcials in the area of
public social policies.
I have in my delegation today a
representative of the Ministry of Social
Development who will be more than happy
to try and address questions you may wish
to raise about these and other cooperation
possibilities.
Dear colleagues,
Our political dialogue has also become
more systematic and more diversifed over the
past years.
The opening of Brazilian embassies in
every Caribbean capital has played a key
role in this process. The Brazilian diplomatic
missions in all 14 member countries of
the Community have allowed us to enrich
our mutual understanding and to ensure
straightforward communication between our
Governments.
On this note, I take the opportunity to
acknowledge the opening of the Jamaican
Embassy in Brasília and, at the same time, I
wish to encourage other CARICOM members,
who have not yet done so, to move in the same
direction.
I have instructed my team to carry out
frequent visits to the Caribbean region in order
to meet with local governments and societies,
and I myself plan to visit other Caribbean
countries later this year.
We are determined to continue to build
upon the framework established in April
2010, at the First Brazil-CARICOM Summit,
in Brasília. We are following the roadmap
established at that pivotal meeting.
There remain outstanding tasks ahead of
us. For instance, we still need to turn into
reality the political consultation mechanism
established in the Brasilia Declaration.
Likewise, as I have discussed with some
of you on previous occasions, we need to
organize a ministerial meeting in preparation
for the Second Brazil-CARICOM Summit,
which could take place some time in 2013.
yet much has already been done over the
last two years.
Mutual discovery of our common heritage
was one of the main objectives of the
Declaration stemming from the 2010 Summit.
The Declaration of Brasília recommended the
conduct of studies on slavery and its impact on
the formation of our cultures, so as to assign
the proper value to the African roots of our
shared history.
It was in the intent of meeting this mandate
that the Brazilian Government held a series of
lectures on the subject, as a part of the IberoAmerican Meeting of the Afro-descendent
Peoples held last November in Salvador, in the
State of Bahia. The lectures were given by the
same 15 scholars (one from each CARICOM
country and one Brazilian) that contributed
with essays to the book “The African Heritage
in Brazil and the Caribbean”, which we took
the initiative of publishing in 2011, also as a
follow-up to the Brasília Declaration.
The bonds that unite us are plenty, and they
also include common challenges in a fast-changing international arena.
Common challenges are better dealt with
in a coordinated fashion.
That is why we attach such high value to
meetings like this one. That is also why we
are truly enthusiastic about the potential of
the recently-established Community of Latin
America and Caribbean States – CELAC.
Distinguished colleagues,
Before concluding, allow me to refer to the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, which we will be hosting in
Rio de Janeiro this coming June.
On behalf of President Dilma Rousseff, I
would like to reiterate the invitation for your
Heads of Government, and yourselves, to
attend the Rio+20 Summit.
The summit, twenty years after the frst
historic conference in Rio de Janeiro in 1992,
and ten years after the 2002 Johannesburg
summit, is a crucial opportunity to advance
the commitments of the world community
regarding some of the major challenges of the
21st century.
The 1992 Conference in Rio was a point of
arrival. Rio+20 will be the point of departure
for the establishment of a new paradigm of
development – one that can prove sustainable
in its social, economic and environmental
dimensions.
This is a major defning issue of our time,
affecting all of us and generations to come.
No decision about a new paradigm of
development will be viable without a truly
representative participation of the international
community at large.
We count on the decisive contribution of
your Governments to ensure the success of
that UN common effort. It will also be the
success of each one of our societies.
Thank you very much.