“Time to get serious about agricultural
subsidies”
Artigo do Presidente da República, Luiz Inácio
Lula da Silva, publicado no jornal francês
“International Herald Tribune”
Brasília, 2.6.2006
The meeting of European and Latin American-
Caribbean countries held in Vienna in the beginning
of May allowed for a fruitful exchange of views on
many issues. Most important, it provided the
opportunity for leaders to discuss the need to arrive
quickly at a balanced, ambitious conclusion to the
so-called Doha Development Agenda.
The Doha round is the best chance we have
to reduce and eventually eliminate agricultural
subsidies and to open markets for agricultural
products. These are essential steps needed to increase
wealth and create jobs through international trade, particularly in developing countries.
There is a growing awareness that subsidies
are not only immoral, but also illegal. Decisions taken
by the World Trade Organization in the last few years
- - many in response to complaints brought by Brazil
- have endorsed the view that subsidies profoundly
distort international trade. They increase poverty in
developing countries, encourage inefficiency among
producers in developed nations and punish
consumers worldwide.
Trade in agricultural goods has never been
the subject of a serious liberalization effort. Trade in
industrial goods, by contrast, was the main goal of
previous rounds under the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT). As a result, protection of
industrial products was significantly reduced
everywhere, while protection of the agricultural sector
was barely scratched. It is time to redress this
imbalance.
Eliminating agricultural subsidies and opening
markets in rich countries will affect no more than 1 to
2 percent of their labor force. That is nothing
compared to the 30 to 35 percent of workers who
hold industrial jobs in developing countries, whose
markets for imported industrial goods are being
targeted by richer nations.
Agriculture protectionism depresses living
conditions worldwide to the benefit of a handful of
privileged farmers in rich countries. More balanced
international trade relations will have a multiplying
effect on developing countries, where a significant part
of the population makes a living from agriculture. This
is particularly true of Africa, where millions of people
who now face poverty and hunger will be included in
the world economy.
The Hong Kong ministerial meeting late last
year did not produce sufficient results, although some
progress was achieved. Recent talks in Geneva have
been increasingly permeated by a sense of frustration.
The general perception is that positions have been
crystallized and further moves are even more difficult.
We all know that progress will only be
achieved if all parties move at the same time. For
example, the United States must make significant cuts
in its agricultural subsidies; the European Union has
to open further its markets for agricultural goods, and
developing countries are expected to make
appropriate moves in industrial goods and services.
This three-way bargain cannot be seen as an
equilateral triangle. The level of wealth in developed
and developing countries is profoundly unequal. It is
more than fair that the richest countries make deeper
cuts. And the poorer among the poor should bear no
cost; they must only gain from a trade negotiating
process that is rightly called a development round.
Other developing countries must also take
concrete steps in accordance with their possibilities.
We must not be under the illusion, however, that
concessions by developing countries in and of
themselves will have the magic power to unleash the
movement required from rich countries.
A recent editorial in the International Herald
Tribune on the dismal state of the negotiations alluded
to the need to “call in the paramedics”. I agree.
I am absolutely convinced that the time has
come to involve world leaders in the Doha process.
At the upcoming G-8 summit meeting in Saint
Petersburg we will have an opportunity to discuss
how to give political impetus to the Doha round.
The success of the Doha round will strengthen
multilateralism. Our ability to make international trade
freer and more just will enhance global governance.
In doing so, we will be fulfilling our responsibility of
addressing, in a collective way, the complex
challenges of the modern world.
