Entrevista do Presidente Luiz Inácio Lula da
Silva, concedida à revista The Economist –
Interview with Brazil’s President (Brasília, em
24.2.2006)
The following is an edited transcript:
The Economist: Next week you will meet
British Prime Minister Tony Blair. What will you say
to him about the global trade negotiations?
President: We have a fairly full agenda to
discuss with Tony Blair. Naturally, the WTO and
Doha Round are extremely important, because, as I
have already told Tony Blair on the telephone and,
afterwards, in South Africa, some sort of gesture is
needed in these negotiations. One where neither the
rich nations nor the emerging countries are the big
winners; where the big winners are the world’s poorest
nations, whether in Latin America, Africa or Asia,
because what we decide in the Doha Round will
affect humanity over the next 20 or 30 years.
My point to Tony Blair, who was the first head
of state I ever spoke to, is that we can’t simply leave
these negotiations to the negotiators, the UK
representative, the Brazilian representative, the
German representative or the US representative.
Eventually, we’ll have to bring together the heads of
state to decide on important matters.
I’m concerned above all about the issue of
agriculture for poor countries. I know that in Europe
agriculture isn’t just an economic issue, it’s much more
a political one. In France, just 1% of the work force
is in farming; in England, it’s 2.8%, in the European
Union 4.8%. But in Brazil it represents 25%, in Asian
countries 50% and in Cameroon 70%.
So, countries with these big farming sectors
need to have some encouragement, a gesture so that
they can make agricultural trade a little more
favourable for the poorest countries. Europe needs
to take a more progressive position, a more
humanitarian one. Not thinking just about the next
elections, but for the next 30 years.
What do we want for the world? I think that
peace, the fight against terrorism and the reduction
of fundamentalism, are connected to improving the
quality of life of the poor. This is one matter I’m very
anxious to discuss with Prime Minister Blair. Another
topic high on the agenda, which could be an excellent
policy for fragile economies, is renewable energy,
especially ethanol and biofuels. Germany has a strong
policy here and I believe that the UK could also play
an important role.
The Economist: In what sense?
President: We need to use biodiesel as the
basis for partnerships with poorer countries, and to
develop biodiesel production in these poorer nations.
Biodiesel is an important creator of jobs. Here in
Brazil, we have gained in-depth experience through
five companies that already produce biodiesel. We
created something called the Social Seal. Under this
system, a company buying vegetable oil from small
producers gets a tax exemption. This enables us to
create thousands of jobs for small producers of soya,
castor bean seeds, sunflower seeds and cottonseed.
Who knows, over the next few decades,
instead of talking about “prospecting for oil” , we’ll
plant oil. Instead of drilling a well 2,000 metres deep,
we’ll dig a little 30-centimetre hole, plant a seed and,
after it has grown to 1.80 metres, harvest it and
transform it into biodiesel. Now that would be
something: less pollution, a job creator, renewable,
something to last a lifetime.
The Economist: To obtain this agriculture agreement, is Brazil prepared to substantially reduce
tariffs on manufactured products ?
President: Substantially, no. Proportionally
to the value and weight of our economy. Brazil is
prepared to do its part to be flexible in both industry
and services proportionally to the weight of our
economy. Our discussions must take into account not
only the immediate context of the next election, or
the immediate context of each individual country, but
a more humanitarian context. We are making
agreements that could impact humanity for over the
next 30 years. So, there have to be concessions, after
which the emerging economies can make theirs,
followed by the poorest countries. That way, we’ll
be doing something more equitable, in terms of
distributing the results of the wealth we want to
produce over the next few decades.
The Economist: So, in proportion to the size
of the economy, rather than in proportion to the rich
nations’ concessions?
President: Look, the rich countries’
concessions will also be based on their economic and
political needs. In other words, the concessions must
be proportional to the offers made by the rich nations,
they have to be proportional to the weight of each
country in trade. This agreement is more about
economics for the poor countries and more about
politics for the emerging and the wealthy countries.
And this I can say sincerely because Brazil has no
fear of competing with rich nations when it comes to
farming. We have the technology, the land and all the
ideal conditions for competing with any country. So,
when we go to the WTO and fight to bring our sugar
or our cotton into the European market, we’re fighting
not only for our own interests but because this helps
many other countries, such as Benin, which produces
450,000 tons, on which its economy is built.
I’ve got great expectations for my visit to the
UK, based on our good relationship with Tony Blair.
I think the UK can play an important role in this WTO
matter. I see goodwill in Tony Blair. I’ve just seen a
statement by Pascal Lamy [director-general of the
484
WTO], saying that the presidents are not going to
interfere, and I just want to say I’m not worried about
his statement – he’s doing his job. What concerns
me is trying to find out what Tony Blair thinks, what
Bush thinks, what whoever has the decision-making
power thinks.
The Economist: Did you propose a summit
meeting?
President: I proposed the need for a meeting
some time before the Doha Round. In my case, for
example, if in May we have a Latin American and
European Union summit meeting, you can be sure
that I’ll jump on a plane and go to it, if the main leaders
are involved. If Tony Blair and Chirac are going, I’ll
definitely go too, because I’m stubborn and won’t
give up my ideas. I think the UK could be an
important partner in making discussions at the WTO
more flexible.
The Economist: Brazil is fighting for a
permanent seat on the UN Security Council. How
would this help Brazil and the world?
President: Let’s turn this question around.
Brazil is fighting for a deep reform of the UN. The
UN has been around for 60 years, and the conflicts
for which it was created are no longer there or, at
least, not to the same extent. The UN must consider
the new geopolitics. The bipolar world has gone, along
with the Cold War; democracy is firmly consolidated
in many more countries. So, what do we want? We
want the UN, not just the Security Council, to more
fully represent today’s political world. The Security
Council must change.
We must equip the UN with mechanisms that
give it the credibility to make decisions. After the UN
is reformed, Brazil, obviously, as the largest country
in Latin America, is applying for a seat. Others will
apply. We believe that the continents need to be better
represented. Africa has 59 countries, so it should have
at least two representatives on the Security Council.
Here we have Brazil, we have Mexico, we have
Argentina, all of them countries that could apply. I
had the opportunity to discuss this with [Chinese President] Hu Jintao. Why can’t Japan, one of the
largest economies in the world, be [on the Security
Council]? We can’t allow the problems of the last
century to influence decisions that will affect future
centuries.
Occasionally, I come across a political leader
worried about something that happened in the 19th
or 18th century, for heaven’s sake! I believe we need
the maturity and sensitivity to consign these events to
history and to find ways to make new agreements for
the future. After all, we don’t govern for those who
went before; we govern for those who come after.
This should be the basis for the UN reform. A UN
prepared for the future is a stronger and more
democratic UN, one that is more decisive in resolving
conflict and faster to take action. And here is where
we need the weight of the more important countries.
Often, the UN takes a decision but, if that decision
isn’t backed by the US or China very often it simply
isn’t implemented. So, what we want is for all of us
to take these decisions together after the necessary
discussions. But, when the decision is taken, it must
be implemented. That will apply to Israel, to Palestine,
to China, to the US, to Brazil, to Bolivia.
The Economist: Your counterpart,
[Venezuelan President] Hugo Chávez, is an elected
President, but he does not govern very democratically.
International observers have called for a new electoral
authority for the presidential elections. Brazil seems
reluctant to criticise Hugo Chávez. Why is that?
President: First, because it’s not Brazil’s job
to criticise governments democratically elected in their
own countries. I have a warm personal relationship
with President Chávez, and Brazil has a trade,
economic and infrastructure investment relationship
with Venezuela. It was Brazil that proposed forming
the Group of Friends of Venezuela to consolidate the
referendum [seeking Mr Chávez’s recall], with the
involvement of people like Jimmy Carter, who played
an important role in producing a carefully monitored
and well structured referendum. I remember, on the
25 th of January 2003, I hardly knew Chávez when I
proposed the Group of Friends, and asked the US
and Spain to take part. Why did I suggest the United
States and Spain? Because these are two countries
that had the biggest conflicts with Venezuela. The
United States as the focus of conflict with President
Chávez and Spain because it had recognised the coup
in Venezuela. And I told Chávez that it only makes
sense to form a Group of Friends if they are not friends
of Chávez. They have to be friends of Venezuela and
of Venezuelan democracy. And today, thanks to this
Group of Friends, after much discussion, much to-
ing and fro-ing, with the help of the OAS, we managed
to make sure that things went well in Venezuela.
Right here in this room, I told President Bush
that, before my term of office ends, I want to see him
and Chávez seated at the same table to discuss their
differences. Chávez is convinced, and claims to have
proof, that the coup against him was organised to
benefit the United States. Mr Bush doesn’t accept
that. This will only be resolved if they talk. It’s very
funny, because the United States needs Venezuela.
The Economist: In what sense?
President: Because a lot of the oil consumed
in the United States comes from Venezuela. And
Venezuela needs the US, precisely because it sells a
lot of its oil to the United States. In other words,
Venezuela is interested in selling and the US is
interested in buying. It’s a basic rule in politics that
you can’t let rumours get in the way of the truth. And
if these two presidents don’t talk, if neither is even
willing to talk and settle their differences, there’ll never
be a solution. That’s why I work so hard towards an
understanding between Venezuela and the US,
because I believe the world needs more peace and
fewer problems. Venezuela needs to develop;
economic growth is essential for the country after so
many years of lagging behind. Chávez is a President
of great value to Venezuela. Sometimes I worry about
certain articles in the US press opposing Chávez,
which then lead Chávez to write big articles against
the United States; it doesn’t help. One day President
Bush and President Chávez must talk. If there were errors in the past, we must now construct a path to
the future, as if we were rebuilding a bridge that had
been destroyed. And I – you may think I’m a dreamer
here – but, I really believe this is possible, because
Brazil would do everything we can to avoid conflict
in South America.
The Economist: Do you agree with Chávez
that the Free Trade Area of the Americas [FTAA] is
dead?
President: When I took office the FTAA was
a highly ideological matter. Brazil was divided: those
against the FTAA were on the left; those for it were
on the right. So, what did we do about it over these
36 months? We removed the ideological baggage
from the discussion and emphasised instead rebuilding
Mercosur, so that, at the WTO, we could discuss
the construction of the G-20 [a group of developing
countries lobbying for access to rich countries’
agricultural markets], created at the Cancun meeting.
It’s vital not to confuse trade with ideology. At a recent
summit in Mar del Plata, Argentina, President Bush
stressed the importance of first settling WTO
problems, and later discussing our trade problems
here. Today, neither the United States nor Brazil is
making the FTAA a priority.
In our last meeting there was a difference of
opinion between Mexico and Venezuela, published
in the Argentine press and, also, I think, in Brazil,
where the FTAA was defended by Mexico and
opposed by Chávez. I said, this is not how to discuss
it: one party is ideologically opposed and the other is
ideologically in favour. Let’s first settle what needs to
be settled. Let us prepare ourselves for the Doha
Round.
When this event is over, let’s see what we
can do here. Many countries have discussed free
trade with the United States. The US is Brazil’s biggest
individual trade partner. We want to improve this
relationship, without creating any situation where we
could undermine smaller countries’ development
potential. So, I don’t see the FTAA as an ideological
problem. It is not something we debate today the
486
same way we did four years ago. I believe that we
have all matured; we are aware that, in this globalised
world, we need each other much more than we did
during the Cold War.
The Economist: You say you placed greater
importance on Mercosur, but Mercosur is not doing
well: the partners are fighting, there are tariff barriers
and Brazil has not incorporated Mercosur norms into
its domestic legislation. Doesn’t Brazil have to
relinquish a little of its sovereignty to improve the
group, which is supposed to be the motor of
integration for South America. And if so, how?
President: Let’s take a look at how
Mercosur was when I took office. Nobody believed
in Mercosur any more. Reinstating confidence in
Mercosur was no easy task. The election of Néstor
Kirchner in Argentina, of Tabaré Vázquez in Uruguay,
of Paraguay’s Nicanor Duarte were all important and
let us show that we don’t need to run away from
trade disagreements. They happen. When a country’s
industrial sector feels threatened, it turns that into a
fight with the other country. The leaders have to
patiently seek a compromise. As I have said so often,
Brazil, as Mercosur’s biggest economy, needs to be
more generous, must make greater concessions, so
that other countries can grow.
When President Kirchner complains, I often
sympathise with him, because Argentina was
deindustrialised, and it is perfectly normal for the
president of a country to try to get industry back.
How long did it take to build the European
Union? Many years. And, even now, there has just
been a plebiscite where France voted to reject the
constitution. The UK did not accept the single
currency. In other words, after 50 years of debate,
there is still disagreement, and we’re talking about
people who have more education than ours.
So, please understand our disagreements,
because they’re normal for emerging countries that
are trying to create something very similar to what
was built in the developed world, but in a much
shorter time. What’s important is the political clarity we have today on the importance of Mercosur for all
of us. Will there be differences? Of course. You’ll
always have differences in our globalised world. Right
now, there’s debate over a pulp plant between
Uruguay and Argentina. I know both Tabaré and
Kirchner well. And, God willing, they will find a
solution to this problem, because I can’t understand
how a pulp plant can create such conflict between
two neighbouring countries. Both Presidents have
similar ideological beliefs; they are both aware of the
importance of unity within Mercosur and of the
importance of unity between Argentina and Uruguay.
Very often, because we put off talking, we start
conducting politics through the press. I believe that,
very soon, Kirchner and Tabaré will sit down together
and find a solution.
The Economist: You said that, in its capacity
as the biggest Mercosur country, Brazil should be
more generous, but I see few examples of this
generosity.
President: The last agreement entered into
with Argentina, was a gesture by Brazil to Argentina.
The Economist: ...the safeguards
[agreement to limit imports under certain
circumstances].
President: This was a gesture by Brazil to
Argentina. These things do not happen by decree,
they happen by persuasion. I have suggested that
Brazilian enterprises invest in Uruguay and Paraguay.
These are small economies, so some things can be
produced in these countries that will give them greater
and more equitable involvement in the Mercosur game.
I’ve had several conversations on this matter with
Kirchner and I think we’re getting somewhere. When
we start demanding too much of Mercosur, we must
remember that, historically, Argentina and Brazil have
always had many cultural differences – in football, in
music. Just to give you an idea, during the military
government, when Brazil decided to build the Itaipu
dam, the Argentine military thought this could be used
to flood Buenos Aires and they retaliated by
threatening to build an atomic bomb. Brazilian
diplomats have always had problems with Argentine
diplomats who, in turn, have difficulties with their
Brazilian counterparts. But this is something that
Kirchner and I are in the process of dismantling. Both
his and my foreign affairs ministers have worked hard
to remove these anti-Brazilians and anti-Argentines
from decision-making positions, to enable us to build
an alliance between the two most important Southern
Cone countries.
The Economist: Could you tell us about your
relationship with the new president of Bolivia, Evo
Morales?
President: I have known Evo Morales for
many years, since the days of the union movement.
From a historical and sociological standpoint, the
election of Evo Morales is extraordinary, with great
prospects and potential for the Bolivian people.
Naturally, I’m aware that between theory and practice
there is a gulf bigger than the Atlantic Ocean and that,
on becoming President, one must combine theory
with practice. What’s the difference? There’s a song
by a Brazilian singer saying the difference between
the practical and the theoretical is that a theorist sees
the day as 24 hours and the realist sees it as split into
morning, afternoon and night.
The Economist: Who’s the singer?
President: Djavan. This song was written by
Djavan. When we win the election and take office –
Kirchner, Evo Morales, anyone – we discover that
the art of governing lies in the art of doing what is
possible. And the possible is only a little harder, but it
can be achieved. So, Evo Morales could represent a
step forward for Bolivia because, for a population
that’s over 70% indigenous, it’s only right that the
President be elected from this population, just as in
South Africa, where 75% of the population is black,
it’s important that the President represent the majority.
And I believe that Evo Morales is aware, first of all,
of Bolivia’s difficult situation, and is conscious of the
importance of his partners in Brazil who have helped
him. I’ve had meetings with Argentina, with Chávez
and with Colombia, and everybody wants to help Bolivia and Evo Morales. Obviously, to the extent he
tells us what he needs and to the extent that we can
actually do some things. Brazil can help him, especially
in infrastructure. I’m convinced that Evo Morales can
be a success in Bolivia. It’s important to remember
Bolivia’s political culture, and that President Evo
Morales has an extraordinary opportunity to maintain
the trust of the country’s indigenous population and
of Bolivian society as a whole. Slowly, he can create
policies that will satisfy the demands of the majority .
Let me give you an example. The Biodiesel
Programme could be implemented in Bolivia and could
help to give the farmer a choice between planting coca
and planting biodiesel, by planting vegetable oil crops.
I spend a lot of time reading and studying the
behaviour of richer nations that want to wipe out the
drug trade. They give money to the country in
question, get the armed forces and police to enforce
these policies. I often imagine this possibility: what if
the US decided to buy all the coca produced in Bolivia
and disappeared with it, paying a higher price than
the drug traders? Wouldn’t that be a better solution?
If the richer countries decided to purchase Bolivia’s
entire coca production, leaving only the volume
required to produce the indigenous coca tea, and then
vanish with the coca production, wouldn’t this be
more efficient than using the army? Wouldn’t it be
more effective? Because, what would happen then?
The worst-case scenario would be that the price
would rise so much that, maybe, the price of cocaine
would become so prohibitive that people would give
up their addiction because they couldn’t afford to buy
the drug.
Also, we have the experience of the last
century to prevent us from committing the same errors
in this new century. So, I feel very optimistic about
Evo Morales, very optimistic. I think he’s still at a
very early stage of the new government, and the first
year is always very difficult, because the previous
government drew up the budget, so he can’t define
his priorities. But I support him and I’ll work to help
him. I was very pleased when I heard that President
488
Bush had phoned him, because if you don’t do that
you can sometimes lose contact because someone
spoke ill of somebody else. I always say nobody is
100% bad and nobody is 100% good. And, so you
build the relationships that can be formed.
I believe that the UK can help Bolivia, as can
Brazil and the United States, because this is an
extraordinary experience for the oppressed people
of Bolivia.
The Economist: Let’s talk about the
economy. The economy is growing but at half the
rate of other developing countries. Why?
President: Firstly, I believe that Brazil’s
economic health should not be measured just in terms
of GDP, because history also shows that other
countries have grown, at different times, by over 6%
or 7% a year, but with no distribution of wealth the
poor stayed poor. We can find examples all over the
world where GDP growth does not necessarily mean
that the government has introduced social justice. In
Brazil, we’re not in a hurry to make the economy
take off immediately. First, we wanted to consolidate
our macroeconomic base for Brazil to achieve a
growth cycle that could last ten to 15 years, what the
economists call sustainable growth.
You’ve been in Brazil since the day I took
office. You know how Brazil was when we inherited
it, how we suffered that first year, because, in 2003,
many people who today criticise Brazil’s growth rate
thought we wouldn’t be able to cope with our
problems. So, first of all, we need to be very prudent,
to not be depressed by criticism, to not let praise go
to our heads, to not be influenced by things that seem
easy but that, at other times in history, were done by
some and were a failure.
And I had on my mind the many times it was
announced to the four corners of the earth that Brazil
had a new economic plan, a really miraculous one,
that would solve the country’s problems. I’ll give you
the example of the Plano Real. We needed three reais
to buy one dollar, and, suddenly the real became more
important than the dollar. You needed 81 centavos to buy a dollar. So, this was wonderful. Everybody
believed that Brazil had already conquered the world.
It hadn’t. And there were others – and I won’t name
names here – other plans existed in 1986, in 1985, in
1990. Every now and again someone would appear
and produce a plan. This usually resulted in six months
of euphoria and ten years of depression and loss.
For Brazil to build a new sustainable growth cycle,
first we had to regain our external credibility. Second,
we had to control inflation. Third, we had to control
public spending, spending only what was absolutely
necessary, without spending more than we produced.
I didn’t see this as theory; no, I saw it in my
daily life. For 27 years, I worked inside a factory,
and my wife always said, “Lula, we can’t run up debts
that we can’t pay off. So, if we can’t buy a fridge
now, we’ll wait until we can afford it.” Because, very
often, you think it’ll be easy to pay off 500 instalments,
so you buy a pile of stuff and, on the day you start to
repay you realise you can’t pay it all off.
These were our guiding principles. In other
words, we’ll make the sacrifice that we must make
now to give Brazil the possibility of 15 years of
economic growth. I don’t want to grow by 10% or
15% a year – that’s not what I’m looking for. I want
a lasting growth cycle averaging 4% or 5%, so that
Brazil can make up for lost time and so people will
recognise that there will be no magic in the economy.
There’ll be no amazing announcement, one of those
that looks like the salvation of humanity and the next
day leaves humanity in despair.
Do you know what the Brazil risk was then
and what it is now? We began the tax reform and the
social security reform because I believed we had the
necessary political capital to carry out the reform then.
There is still the part of the tax reform involving the
states, which will end the tax war. Many who
campaigned for the tax reform will now have to explain
why they didn’t do their part. We’ve done the federal
government’s part; we’re just waiting for theirs.
The Economist: The [state] governors?
President: The governors.
The Economist: You say that it’s important,
and I agree, to control expenditure, but what
happened during your presidency? You achieved very
high primary surpluses. But, at the same time non-
financial expenses increased greatly, the minimum
wage increased, which permanently harms the budget.
The debt did not drop and interest rates are very
high as a result. What must be done to resolve this
problem?
President: Look, for many years, Brazil lived
an eternal dilemma. First the country had to grow in
order to distribute wealth later. And, as we see it, we
have to distribute wealth together with growth, so
that the gulf between people doesn’t get any greater.
Increasing the minimum wage is necessary to
guarantee that the poorest part of the population has
the right to eat. We went from spending 7 billion reais
on social programs to 22 billion reais. We went from
spending 2.4 billion reais on family farming to 9 billion.
And now we’re seeing the results.
The Brazilian press has widely publicised the
growth in consumption of the C and D or the E and
D classes [lower-income groups]. What we managed
with microcredit in this country, what we managed to
do with crédito consignado [lending against
paycheques], was a revolution from the point of view
of placing money in the market for people to be able
to consume, and we are seeing results. In 2005, we
had a problem because inflation threatened to get out
of control, but 2006 will be a good growth year. The
foundations are being built for us to make a leap in
quality.
Brazil did not have the money to carry on
importing. Today, we have the luxury of repaying the
IMF $15.6 billion. Now, we’re paying off the 1986
moratorium bonds and, next, we’ll settle our debt
with the Paris Club. And, why are we doing this?
Because the economy is straightened out, because
we have solid reserves. One important thing is that,
in 2005, even Petrobras, which always represented
a deficit in our balance of trade, recorded a $3 billion
dollar surplus. So, I would say that the ground is reasonably prepared; the base has been consolidated.
Now, for example, we’ve decided not to make
the central bank alone responsible for controlling
inflation. Because we set the inflation target, and the
central bank must aim for that inflation target and,
therefore, when it perceives an increase in demand,
its role is what? To reduce demand to control inflation.
But you can’t make the central bank the villain,
partly because setting inflation targets is not the central
bank’s job, it’s the government’s. So, what are we
doing? Now, we’re in the process of reducing import
tariffs on products that we know are increasing in
price more than they should. Last year, we did this
with steel, which had increased too much. So we
reduced the rate and the price stopped climbing. Now,
we’re using these rates like a sluice on a hydroelectric
dam. Need more energy? Open the sluice. Need
less? Close it. Or, better still, the opposite. So, with
this we guarantee that the central bank takes care of
monetary policy, but has the help of the government
in fighting inflation.
During the first two years of my government,
administered prices were increasing by 30%, 29%
while inflation was 10%. This year, these prices are
increasing by 2%, 1%. So, things are better managed,
more controlled, and it is from this growth will come.
We’ve just approved another measure. I issued a
provisional decree exempting foreigners buying
Brazilian securities from income tax. Why? Because,
if we compare Brazilian debt with the GDP it is not
very high. Many rich countries have a bigger debt
than ours. The problem with our debt is the repayment
schedule. So, we’re placing securities and intend to
sell pre-fixed securities for ten, 15 years, and, yes,
this will make our economy more robust. In my
opinion, this measure will produce very important
medium term results.
The Economist: Many people agree that the
government should help the central bank. But I think,
as do many people, that a long-term reduction in the
deficit is far more important. Recently, your finance
minister, Antonio Palocci, advocated a social
490
agreement to reduce government spending and
improve its quality. Will you fight for this social
agreement? Or do you agree with Minister Dilma
Rousseff [Lula’s chief of staff], that...
President: Look, there are two important
points here. There is no disagreement between
Palocci and Dilma on the correctness of fiscal policy.
What, in fact, is under discussion is the timing. In an
election year it’s hard to achieve a social accord, but
I am fully aware that, in a quieter period, everyone
will agree that we need a commitment not to spend
more money than we can. I’m convinced of this, and
I know people well enough to be sure that the social
movement is willing to do it, the government is willing
to do it and I hope Congress is willing to do it. Now
what’s important for us? The Brazilian state was
completely dysfunctional. You saw what happened
to us when the international press publicised the
increased deforestation of the Amazon region,
because we had no inspectors, we had nothing. We
had the environment ministry and Ibama [the federal
environmental agency], both of them powerless to
take action.
What happened after we straightened out the
ministry? Minister Marina Silva announced a 31%
decrease in deforestation, which proves that there is
no truth in this story that the government can’t do
anything. The government has a duty. The more solid
the state, the more flexible it can be, the more organised
it is, the more it can withdraw from certain activities.
Often, the state is strong if the economy is in a
shambles and the state takes over everything. We
don’t want to be responsible for everything. We
believe that business has an important role to play,
and we feel that the state does too. We believe the
state should gradually withdraw from the economy.
But how do we educate without state
investment to bring the teachers back? We had to
hire 9,008 teachers to fill positions and cover new
courses. We are creating four new federal universities,
we are transforming six faculties into universities,
creating 32 new university extensions and taking them into the interior of Brazil. And why are we doing this?
Because we know that, if Brazil does not invest in
education, we’ll never make the quality leap that the
UK made, that France made, that Korea made. We
must make this quality leap.
Congress will vote in the National Basic
Education Fund to ensure that our new policy of
better serving basic education is sustained. We’ve
increased our children’s schooling period to nine
years, we’re building 32 technical schools, 25 of
which I shall shortly inaugurate, because as Brazil
grows, we’ll need skilled workers. And this will give
Brazil comparative advantages in this globalised
world. Right, so we hire teachers. Well, do we hire a
lot? We hire only the number we need. But how do
you take care of health issues without a doctor? How
do you take care of education without teachers?
Here’s an example: We created something called
ProUni. With a very small tax exemption, we created
the biggest scholarship program in the history of Brazil:
203,000 scholarships were granted between January
2005 and 2006, 30% of which went to the African-
Brazilian community. Now this is an extraordinary
achievement. There are 38,000 young black people
in university, something unthinkable ten years ago.
So, the Brazilian state...and this comes from
the heart. I came from the trade union movement and
became President of the Republic, and there’s
something I always say: I won’t throw away this
opportunity given to me by the people. I won’t throw
it away. And I know that, in order not to throw it
away, above all, I must show Brazilians how seriously
we treat the state, the economy and the social area.
And this has been shown. How many countries have
achieved what we have: fiscal responsibility and a
strong social policy at the same time?
The Economist: Usually governments only
manage two or three important changes during each
term of office, and usually at the beginning. So, what
do you think are the most important reforms that the
next president should carry out?
President: Look, first of all we’ve got to finish
the tax reform. Secondly, we need to vote the trade
union structure reform in Congress. The National
Labour Forum is now discussing labour reforms, and
we have to carry out our political reform. The
Brazilian political system must be very carefully
examined. In any other country, anyone who obtained
49% of votes in the first round [of an election] could
be certain of the support of at least 50% of Congress.
Under the Brazilian electoral system, I got the 49%
but only 14 senators out of 81, and only 90
representatives out of 513. So, we need a political
reform that will give Brazil the seriousness it needs to
have in the world. And I think these are the priority
reforms, because agrarian reform is part of the
country’s day-to-day existence and is ongoing. But
political reform, tax reform, labour reform, which is
now under discussion in the National Labour Forum,
and the trade union reform – the proposal is ready –
have to be voted by Congress.
The Economist: Will this labour reform
introduce more flexibility into the conditions for hiring
and even dismissing workers?
President: Look, dismissals aren’t a problem
any more in Brazil. In fact, there are too many
dismissals. I doubt that as many people are fired in
the UK as in Brazil. Brazilian turnover is very high.
What we’re after in this labour reform – and it won’t
be me doing it; it has to be the trade unions with the
government, jointly with the input of business and
Congress – is to bring our labour legislation into the
21 st century. Our present legislation was enacted in
1943, and it must be updated to address matters that
are a problem nowadays. We want to make it easier
for a company to hire a worker, to reduce the
obstacles involved in hiring, but we also want the
worker to be treated with more dignity and respect.
I think that, nowadays, there is a meeting of interests
between companies, represented by their unions, and
workers. I’m confident we’ll submit a good labour
reform proposal that will be appreciated by Congress.
This is mainly because our proposal does not come
from the government, but from the people, like the university reform we’re working on. It isn’t my reform.
Over 2,000 people were involved in this reform; it’s
now in the hands of Congress. I’ve told people that
university reform isn’t the government’s; it’s society’s.
So, vote, because this is how we’ll give autonomy to
our universities.
The Economist: You didn’t touch on social
security reform, but many people believe that the
major long-term fiscal policy problem is the social
security problem.
President: Let me tell you something
important. We’ve just carried out a social security
reform. We’ve made good progress in the public
sector, the most important part. And we’ve only
worked on a medium and long-term basis, never in
the short-term. Our aim is to reduce the social security
deficit by about 40 billion Reais over the next 15
years. Right now, we’re taking the most thorough
census ever taken in the history of social security, to
identify the non-contributors who are receiving
benefits, to uncover social security fraud. We’ve
updated the social security collection system; we
introduced Super Receita, a single revenue collection
system for Brazil, rather than two. This will all benefit
the social security system. Now, what we need is a
little patience, because rushing usually doesn’t help
in dealing with problems. Minister Nelson Machado
has no doubt that his role is to take that one big step
so we can reduce Brazil’s social security deficit in
both the public and private sectors.
The Economist: But, don’t we need a
fundamental social security reform, for example by
raising the retirement age?
President: Social security is not just a
problem in Brazil. The UK, France, Germany, the
US, all countries have social security problems. And,
as the quality of life and work improves all over the
world, as longevity increases, social security will have
to adapt. Here in Brazil, we’ve got 48-year-olds
retiring – they’re going to spend more of their lives
receiving retirement benefits than actually working.
And we know this requires a different approach. But,
492
we can only do one thing at a time, because if we try
and do everything at once, we’ll end up getting
nowhere.
The Economist: The planning ministry
presented a long-term plan that included a primary
expenditure ceiling, delinking the minimum wage from
social security, and eliminating the public deficit. Are
you in agreement with this plan?
President: First, the Budget Guidelines Law
we sent to Congress last June already limited
spending. Second, delinking the minimum wage from
pensions is easy to say and very difficult to do. I told
my planning minister that, when you have an idea,
before discussing it with the press, you’ve got to run
it by the government to convince the government,
otherwise it’s an aborted child. If there’s one thing I
won’t budge on, in both my private and public life,
it’s that I can only spend what I’ve got, that I can’t
spend and leave my debt to others. I don’t think about
Brazil just for my term of office, I think about the
Brazil of 30 years from now. Thirdly, I won’t give up
on fiscal integrity, because that’s what gives me
credibility, in Brazil and the rest of the world. Now,
at the same time, we’re moving along two tracks at
once: a solid fiscal policy and a solid social policy.
And we’ve proved that they’re not incompatible.
The Economist: But, are they incompatible
with a reduced tax burden?
President: Look, what’s Brazil’s problem?
Let’s examine this: I’ve headed up this government
for three years, and we haven’t increased a single tax
rate so far. Why are we collecting more taxes? First,
because companies have recorded greater profits,
and the big increase we had was from income tax.
Second, because effectiveness of the tax collection
system resulted in increased tax collections. But also
[there is a long list] of the products and other things
that got tax relief this year. We reduced taxes on 38
types of construction material to encourage home-
building.
The Economist: So, does the present tax
burden represent a problem or not? President: It’s a problem. Ideally, as Super
Receita starts working right, we’ll be able to reduce
the tax burden, because you reduce the rate and widen
the base of taxpayers. So, it’ll be fairer for everybody.
The Economist: If the PT [Workers’ Party]
wins the election, will the new government be less
PT-oriented than this one?
President: Look, there’s no such thing as a
government that doesn’t reflect the party that won
the elections. I have no doubt that the UK Labour
Party is the face of Tony Blair’s government. I really
don’t think the Conservatives are governing alongside
Tony Blair, just as I’m certain that the Republican
Party governs the US. Germany’s the country with a
coalition government, because the election results
there practically amounted to a technical stalemate.
In Brazil, we don’t have a PT government. [The
president mentions 12 non-PT ministers]. I very much
doubt that you’ll find a party that’s won the elections in
any country with 12 ministers from other parties. Ideally,
we’d like a government that doesn’t represent a single
political power. This works better under a two-party
system. Here, whoever wins the elections has to form a
coalition, because the Brazilian voting system doesn’t
permit a party to have 300 Representatives, or 50
Senators. So, it’s always going to have to form a
governing coalition. Now, you only form a coalition with
people who want to be part of one. You don’t want to
form a coalition with the opposition.
The Economist: Will the PT ally itself with
centrist parties in the elections?
President: I don’t know, because we haven’t
yet started discussing the elections. At least, I haven’t
started discussing them. But, for sure, the PT will try
to form a political alliance with the parties that support
it today. Also because it’s already clear that the
opposition will be today’s opposition. So, we’re going
to try and make a coalition to fight the elections with
all the parties that want an alliance with the PT.
The Economist: Has the PT lost the right to
claim the ethical high ground here in Brazil [because
of the party-financing scandal known as the
mensalão]?
President: That’s not what the opinion polls
say. Let me tell you something: the best character
reference the PT needs is the results of the
Parliamentary Commissions of Inquiry [CPI].
The problem is that you, living here in Brazil,
you personally witnessed the massacre of the PT. The
PT deserves some blame. Over the next few years,
the PT will have a lot to explain to society. But those
people who attacked us gratuitously will also have to
reflect on what they’ve done. I always say that what
gives a political party credibility in society is when its
accusers can’t provide proof for their accusations, a
common event in Brazil. It’s the easiest thing in the
world here to make accusations: the hardest thing is
to then apologise.
The Economist: But a lot has been proved,
beyond caixa dois [off-the-books party financing].
Apparently, the Post Office CPI is going to submit
evidence that the pension funds, for example, were
used to finance various parties, including the PT.
President: Let’s wait for the results. As I
haven’t seen the report yet, and as it could be used
to accuse us as much as it could be used to defend
us, I’d rather wait for the report. It’s not up to the
President to prejudge on the basis of what people
say. My certainty is that the report, whichever report,
will be an important instrument to defend the PT.
The Economist: It will be an important
defence for the PT?
President: Yes, just as it will be a weapon of
attack for the opposition. Now, after the CPI finishes
its report, we’ve got the federal police, the public
prosecutor and the judiciary.
The Economist: But, in a way, isn’t this PT
massacre justifiable?
President: But I’m not saying it isn’t
justifiable. I do believe that the PT erred and, for that
reason, it will have to explain itself to the country.
There will be no impunity for the PT. The PT is very
big; it’s a party of close to one million members spread
all over. You can’t judge a party because a half-dozen people from the party did something wrong. A whole
family isn’t going to be convicted because one of its
members committed a crime.
The Economist: But this mistake was part
of the party’s financing system, which made it part of
the basic system, and even financed your campaign.
President: When I was running for President,
I wasn’t the President of the Republic. So the PT
couldn’t be financed with money from the system,
because it was the opposition. I know nothing about
this story, I really don’t. For the time being, all we
know is what our adversaries say. I’m a cautious
person, I’d rather await the CPI results. I’ve seen
too much accusation madness in Brazil. There was a
case, not long ago, in this country, where the owner
of a private school was arraigned on paedophilia
charges. He lost his family, his school and then he
proved himself innocent. He never got his family or
his school back. So, I’m very cautious in these
matters. When you reach 60 and your hair starts to
turn white, you learn to count to ten before opening
your mouth. I accuse nobody without proof, because
I realise it’s just as bad to accuse someone frivolously
as to do something illicit.
The Economist: How can something like this
be prevented?
President: I believe that political reform can
help. If you create a public fund for elections, prohibit
private money and you have better control by the
electoral authority, you can reduce the errors that a
political party can commit.
The Economist: But Congress has done very
little, and the government hasn’t done much to reform
politics.
President: No. We proposed it. The
government formed a commission, headed by justice
minister. We gathered up all the proposals from
Congress, and took them to the leadership of
Congress. The government cannot impose voting
schedules, especially in the case of political reforms,
because this is not the President’s role; it’s the role of
Congress and the political parties.
494
The Economist: One root of the problem, I
think, is the number of political appointees, about
20,000. Do we need a reform that will reduce the
number of political appointments?
President: Yes we do. I’m a firm believer –
and we’ve taken some steps in this direction – that
the civil service should have the highest number
possible of career staff. It doesn’t matter who the
President is, or what party is in power, the system
carries on, and this is the process that we must build
in Brazil.
The Economist: But there’s a process going
on right now, a basic reform of the...
President: But, we’ve already done it, we’ve
announced the measures to reduce the number of
public positions [probably meaning political
appointees]. These things can happen to the extent
that the Brazilian civil service becomes more
professional, so that we don’t have to bring any more
people than necessary [from outside] to work in the
public service.
The Economist: You spoke of that the
importance of quality in education, but that cannot
be achieved by money alone. It also comes from
better management of schools. I’d like to know if,
for example, you believe it important to give school
directors the power to hire and fire teachers, to link
their salaries to performance. Would you support
these kinds of reforms?
President: Well, look, the university reform
is exactly that – giving management autonomy to
Brazilian universities.
The Economist: But I’m talking about
primary and secondary schools.
President: Well, Brazilian primary and
secondary schools are a state and municipal
responsibility.
The Economist: I know, but you have a role
in...
President: I think it’s important. The more
freedom and autonomy, the better. I’m one of those
people who believe that freedom never hurt anybody. It may lead to argument, but it is extraordinarily
important. The federal government is directly
responsible for technical education and Brazilian
universities, and we’re doing a lot. We’re doing what
hasn’t been done for many years in Brazil, because we
know that what this country needs is quality schools.
I’ll give you a recent example. I decided to
ask the Minister of Education to organise the
mathematics Olympics. It’s said in Brazil that the poor
would never take part in any mathematics Olympics,
because they only happen in private schools. Do you
know how many kids registered? Eleven and a half
million. And do you know how many took part in the
Olympics: Ten and a half million. Guess how many
geniuses we discovered. Thirty thousand kids of
potential genius. Do you know who took first place?
A blind, deaf and paraplegic child who started school
at the age of ten. Now, I’m going to start on the
Portuguese language Olympics, too.
We’re working on a young people’s education
program, various professional training programs. This
year, we’re going to recruit another 100,000 soldiers,
100,000 more young people who can take a
professional training course while they’re doing their
military service.
To get inner city kids off the streets, we got
together with some local authorities and formed the
ProJovem Program. These are 18- to 24-year-olds
who dropped out of school and are unemployed.
We’re attracting them back to school, paying them a
monthly wage of 120 reais, so they’ll finish the course
and learn a profession.
We’ve set up a factory school that already
has 11,000 students studying within the factory itself.
We’ve got the ministry of labour’s Youth Consortium.
We are, I would say, almost manic to make up for
lost time in training our young people. This is na
extraordinary challenge. And we know that it requires
quality education for Brazil to make this leap.
The Economist: Bolsa Família [a programme
of cash transfers to the poor] works well as a social
programme, but many people see it as a handout.
How could you change Bolsa Família to make it less
like charity?
President: Bolsa Família is the most
important income transfer programme in the world.
The only thing better than this is fulltime work and a
salary, our ultimate goal. The Bolsa Família isn’t a
permanent programme; it’s an emergency programme.
And to make it serious, we imposed certain
conditions. Children must attend school, have all their
vaccinations, and pregnant women must take all the
necessary tests. We formed an association with the
state public prosecutors and with communities, which
have councils that can improve the quality of the
benefits register, because our biggest problem was
the register. We’ve already got 8.7 million families.
That’s a lot of people. Naturally, there is the occasional
mistake and somebody who’s not entitled receives
the grant, but that’s not the federal government’s fault.
We’re not the ones doing the registering. It’s the towns,
the municipal authorities. As we register the families,
we also remove some, so that only those who are
really in need remain. My dream and my wish is that,
one day, we won’t need Bolsa Família any more,
because it will have generated employment and aided
income distribution.
The Economist: Are you convinced that
democracy is consolidated and irreversible in Brazil,
or will this current political fragmentation lead to
problems of governability?
President: Democracy is consolidated in
Brazil, the institutions are consolidated, and there is
no political earthquake that could destroy the
foundations of Brazilian democracy. Divergent
opinions in Brazil are no different from those in any
other country. Once, in the German parliament, I saw
a cup of blood thrown at [former chancellor Gerhard]
Schröder.
The Economist: A cup of blood?
President: A cup with something like blood
in it. Once, in England, in the British parliament, I
saw somebody throw some talcum powder on Tony
Blair. Democracy in Brazil doesn’t escalate beyond a lot of chatter. Our differences are mostly words.
Verbal aggression. That’s as much as our democracy
will allow.
The Economist: During the elections, there
will inevitably be many comparisons between your
tenure and that of Fernando Henrique Cardoso,
[Lula’s predecessor], but I’d like you to compare
the Brazil of today with the Brazil of the future.
President: I’m not interested in comparisons
with any government. What I have and what I must
show the Brazilian people is that, never in the economic
history of Brazil, never, even 20, 30 or 40 years ago,
did we have the solid foundations we have now for
making that quality leap that lies ahead of us. The
Brazil risk level is very low, we have a good trade
surplus, we have good export levels and we have a
good current account surplus. And the Brazil of the
future that I want to show is a better Brazil, one that
moves beyond today’s standards to other better ones.
It will be built on strong investment in education and
training, on tax relief to encourage new investment; it
comes from big investments in science and technology
and, certainly, the result of all this will be economic
growth and distribution of income.
The Economist: And from rationalising
government? Because you said that it should withdraw
from certain activities. Which activities?
President: To be honest, the state has already
withdrawn from most activities. Ideally, the state
should be as big as necessary, no more than that.
Maybe someday I could achieve the level of the UK,
German, or US governments. But, right now, without
the state, various South American economies wouldn’t
function, because there are things that either the
government does or no one does. For example, last
year, we had the PPP [public-private partnership].
The PPP was a project praised in story and song as
the solution for mankind. We created the PPP, we
approved the guarantee fund, but, so far, we have no
PPP project. Why? Because everybody is waiting
for the government to do it. And, believe me, I worked
to get the PPP off the ground. Because it takes more
496
than waving a magic wand. You build these things. You
build and you build and you build and, one day, it
happens. And I think Brazil is prepared for it to happen.
The Economist: When I first arrived here, I
think it was in February 2003, you took part in the
Social Forum and, later, in [the World Economic
Forum in] Davos, I wrote an article on you, entitled
“Man of Two Worlds”. This year you didn’t go to
either of them. Are you still a man of two worlds?
President: Good question, because it was
my idea to go to them both. But, for a President of
Brazil to leave the country to take part in another
country’s forum, amounts almost to a state visit. Very
complicated. One idea we discussed was to hold at
the Social Forum in Caracas a sort of Mercosur
movement, where all the Mercosur presidents could
get together and talk. It didn’t work out, because
every time the state is involved, it’s very difficult. I
didn’t attend the World Social Forum because we
couldn’t organise it properly. I wanted to go as I went
on January 25, 2003, I wanted to go in January 2004
to show what we had achieved in Brazil. But, by the
time I had made up my mind, it was too late. All the
(slots in the schedule) had been taken and could not
be rearranged. But I have faith in the power of God
and, on January 25, 2007, if I become a candidate
and get re-elected, or even if I’m not a candidate, I
want to attend both forums and show the world what
has happened in Brazil over these last four years.
The Economist: So, you still see yourself as
the bridge between the two worlds?
President: Right, because I’ve got a good
relationship with the two worlds.
The Economist: Thank you, Mr President.
