“Summit offers chance to gain consensus”
Artigo publicado pelo Presidente Luiz Inácio
Lula da Silva no “Miami Herald”, Estados
Unidos, 16 de julho de 2006 (versão em inglês)
During the Group of Eight (G-8) Summit in
Saint Petersburg this weekend, I will participate
together with the leaders of the world’s major
industrial and emerging economies in an expanded
dialogue — begun in Evian, France, in 2003 and
enhanced in Gleneagles, Scotland, in 2005 —
concerning important issues on the global agenda.
At a time when global challenges are
increasing in the areas of trade liberalization, economic
coordination, environmental protection and security,
the Saint Petersburg meeting is a cause for optimism
and hope.
President Vladimir Putin’s invitation for Brazil
and other developing countries to participate in the
G-8 discussions is particularly praiseworthy because
it contributes to international governance.
Discussions are now under way at the United
Nations and in the Bretton Woods institutions
regarding the need to reform some multilateral forums
so that they better reflect the realities of the world
today. The mechanism of the expanded G-8, even
with its limitations, contributes to a more-legitimate
debate on a new international order. After all, the
major challenges the G-8 confronts are global issues
that call for solutions involving the entire world.
My life experience, both as a labor leader and
as a politician, has been forged through dialogue,
through negotiations. I’ve learned that it is through
candid conversations, looking into the eyes of one’s
interlocutors without giving up one’s own convictions,
that we can bridge differences and expand consensus.
I am confident that at the Saint Petersburg meeting
my colleagues and I will not fail to demonstrate political
leadership and courage.
These virtues are particularly necessary at this
juncture, when what is at stake is the very credibility
and viability of the World Trade Organization, one of
the pillars of multilateralism. In Saint Petersburg, we
will have what may be our last opportunity to break
the logjam of the Doha Round — so that additional
trade liberalization helps sustain the current period of
solid growth in the world economy while providing
leverage for development. Thus, we can break the
cycle of inequities, which in so many cases is
responsible for the extreme poverty and violence that
especially afflict the poorest countries.
Political will needed
The ministerial meeting in Geneva, at the
beginning of July, made patently obvious what
everyone already knew: that negotiations conducted
exclusively at a technical level cannot advance in the
absence of political will.
For my part, I will take to the meeting Brazil’s
willingness to make the concessions that are within
our reach for the purpose of reaching an agreement.
I trust that my counterparts will take a similar approach
because history surely will not forgive us if we fail to
fulfill, for a few more years or even decades, the legitimate aspirations of the international community,
particularly those of the most impoverished countries.
Energy security is another issue for which we
need to find global solutions. Despite individual
national energy needs, we all share the common
challenge of ensuring access to clean energy from
reliable suppliers at affordable prices.
It is with this aim that I will take to Saint
Petersburg news of the successes Brazil has been
achieving in developing biofuels. I want to share my
enthusiasm for the excellent prospects of ethanol,
biodiesel and H-bio (which is an innovative
combination of vegetable oils and fossil fuels).
• First, these products constitute renewable
energy alternatives, which allow us to diversify the
world”s energy supply while lessening the undesirable
dependency on a limited number of sources and
suppliers.
• Second, these products protect the
environment, both by emitting fewer of the gases
responsible for the greenhouse effect and by using
agricultural wastes and depleted lands.
• Third, these biomass products are
development tools with a strong positive impact on
society. Given the abundance and variety of their
feedstocks and the versatility of the technology
employed, these products facilitate job creation on
small and family farms, as well as in related industries.
Moreover, they generate export revenue for countries
that in many cases depend on a single export
commodity and which now lack energy resources.
Using the full potential of biofuels, however,
depends on creating new models of energy
cooperation. We need to join efforts to create and
disseminate these technologies and open up world
markets for new fuels. Toward this end, Brazil
proposes the creation of an Ethanol Forum that would
gather together the major current or potential
producers and consumers to assist in establishing
international standards to deal with logistical and
technical issues associated with production and
supply of these fuels. It makes perfect sense for Brazil
402
Resenha de Pol. Ext. Brasil, a. 33, n. 99, 2o semestre 2006
and the United States to work closely together toward
the goal of a true globalization of biofuels, because
our two countries together account for 70 percent of
the current world production of ethanol.
Given that each country can produce and
consume different kinds of biofuels, it’s no longer a
question of dividing up the world between producers
and importers nor of creating new dependency
relationships. Our aim is to maximize the advantages
that these new sources of energy can produce, in
terms of agricultural diversification, job creation and
environmental conservation. The potential benefits of
energy from biofuels are limitless, as are their sources
of supply.
The other issues on the Saint Petersburg
agenda call for equally ambitious and innovative
initiatives.
In the field of education, for example, Brazil
offers professional teacher training to poor countries,
which could be financed, in part, by G-8 members.
We also want to see an expansion for other countries
of the program that converts poor country debts into
investments in local educational programs.
Innovative financing
We will also present a significant proposal that
connects to two other issues: combating pandemics
and introducing innovative mechanisms for financing
development. This involves the establishment of an
international central mechanism for purchasing
medications to combat AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis in developing countries, to be funded by
a dedicated international tax on airline tickets.
This plan is already being implemented in quite
a few countries, including in Brazil.
We are all taking ambitious proposals and
expectations to Saint Petersburg. I am confident that
we will return home with new reasons for hope and a
new commitment to global partnership and solidarity.
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva was elected
President of Brazil in 2002.
